{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 AppleSymbols;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red13\green108\blue156;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c50196\c67451;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
There is a particular importance in investigating the effects of free trade agreements on urban and regional growth, because the life-span of a free-trade agreement can affect the size of cities, favoring a drop in urban concentration and reverberating on the size of the less unequal population. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Guatemala participated in several free trade agreements, over the decades, which especially involved Central American countries, and also with countries in other regions. Such trade liberalization favored Guatemala by stimulating the economic growth of the country because, in recent years, there has been a significant change in the size of the population of the major cities of Guatemalan departments due to emigration, mainly toward the United States, and to the relocation of industries within the country. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 According to the New Economic Geography (NGE), the size distribution of cities can be represented by a Pareto distribution, which derives from an empirical regularity called Zipf\'92s law. This law explains how agglomeration forces interact in urban centers promoting economic activity and international trade in general. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In recent decades, surveys were published seeking explanations for an empirical verification of Zipf\'92s law. Among the most important are the works of \cf3 Rosen and Resnick (1980)\cf2 , written more than 20 years ago, which are based on demographic data of the 1970s. Recently, the work of \cf3 Soo (2005) \cf2 became prominent by making various econometric models with current data to explain how changes in urban centers in various parts of the world can be explained by Zipf\'92s law. In this work, the author applies a \'93test\'94 for Guatemala and it was found that it did not empirically corroborate with the Zipf\'92s law. Other important empirical works are by \cf3 Monasterio (2004) \cf2 for the State of Rio Grande do Sul and \cf3 Oliveira (2004) \cf2 for all Brazil. For the case of the effects of a free trade treaty on economic growth are the studies of \cf3 Azevedo (2004)\cf2 , who worked on the case of the Mercosul and, for the specific case of Guatemala, emphasized by the works of \cf3 Naranjo (2003)\cf2 , \cf3 Rodriguez (2005) \cf2 and that of the \cf3 Banco de Guatemala (2006a,b)\cf2 .
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 1 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Accordingly, the aim of this study is to investigate empirically how the life of a free-trade agreement can affect the size of cities (the population of urban areas) and how this influenced the overall economic growth of Guatemala between 1921 and 2004. The data is provided by the Census of the National Institute of Statistics (INE) and the Latin American Demographic Centre (CELADE). Specifically, this work focused on the economic and urban specificities and tries to find correlations between the rule of the order of the cities, free trade or trade liberalization, and the effects of agglomeration forces over the urban concentration and economic growth. Taking into account that for Guatemala there is no shortage of studies that address urban growth related to trade liberalization, thus it is relevant to such investigation since this study may serve to provide guidance on the formulation of public policies to promote the economic growth of this country. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 This work is divided into six parts aside from this introduction (part one). The second part is a summary about the performance of the Guatemalan economy. The third part discusses the Guatemalan trade integration. The fourth part closes the theoretical review, urban economic geography models, free trade impact models on economic growth and the database. The fifth part exposes the empirical evidence and, finally, the last part is devoted to the final conclusions. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 During the fifties, Guatemala joined the model promoted by the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 2 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 and the economic model in force in the country was known as an \'93import substitution\'94 and aimed to improve the country\'92s external position. This model was upheld during the process of Central American economic integration that began in the 1960s and later was known as the \'93Central American Common Market\'94 (CACM). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In the late eighties, Guatemala began changing to a model based on a more open trade with the rest of the world and, at the beginning of the 1990s, it began a diversification process of its economy based on a trade policy that was geared to negotiate free trade agreements with other countries.
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 3 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 The exchange-rate policy has changed permanently: the exchange rate and the interest rate were no longer regulated by the Monetary Authority as they were until 1989. The prices of the basic basket of goods were released in 1986 and completed the process in 1991. Then, taxes were gradually eliminated on exports contained within the Central American System (SAC).
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 4 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Fiscal deficits were financed by the Monetary Authority until the end of the 1980s and in 1994 a constitutional norm was issued which banned the Monetary Authority the right to finance the fiscal deficit. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In the external sector, there was a current account deficit of the payment balance, with a structural character and, the main sources of financing of the current account deficit, used by successive Governments until the eighties, were the International Monetary Reserves (RIN) and the External Public Debt, but these were changed in the 1990s, when the flow of private capital was the main source of funding and the reserves were increased considerably reaching record levels. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 It is worth mentioning that the Guatemalan economy, compared with most of the countries of Latin America, did not experience very severe inflationary processes or hyperinflation, mainly in the 1980s. Two significant inflationary spikes can be highlighted in 1985 and 1986 that have been associated with the excess liquidity in the economy, caused by the high fiscal deficits described earlier and the expansive policies of unsustainable spending. However, the highest inflation was registered in December 1990 due to the expansive monetary policy and the inconsistent democratic Government of President Vinicio Cerezo Ar\'e9valo (1986\'961990). From the nineties, the monetary policy generally restricted the monetarist line and, the obsession in the fiscal deficit reduction, allowed to achieve smaller inflation rates and mainly to reduce the volatility, but achieved GDP growth rates of 3.9% average from 1990 to 2006. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Guatemala\'92s economic growth rate for the period 1960\'962006 can be seen in \cf3 Fig. 1\cf2 , below. The growth rate of gross domestic product (GDP) shown in \cf3 Fig. 1 \cf2 allows the observing of five subperiods of development in Guatemalan economic activity: 1960\'961980; 1981\'961986; 1987\'961998; 1999\'962003 and 2004\'962006. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In the mid-seventies, the first oil crisis, due to the increase in oil prices imposed by the Organization of Petroleum Producing Countries (OPPC), was experienced. This fact deteriorated the terms of Exchange, causing a big drop in the economic activity (about 2.0% in 1975). There was a second oil crisis in 1979 and a mass flight of private capital in 1980, which caused a sharp drop of private domestic investment (\uc0\u8722 12.3% in 1979 and \u8722 22.4% in 1980). During this period, the balance of foreign debt grew by approximately $ 2000 million and became known as the External Debt Crisis. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The duration of the Treaty for the creation of the Central American Common Market (CACM) began in June 4, 1961, initial date for Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua. In April 27, 1962 it started for Honduras and on September 23, 1963 for Costa Rica. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The CACM has its origin in the General Treaty for Central American Economic Integration (1960) and the Central American countries undertook the establishment of a five-year common market, to adopt a uniform Central American import policy and to establish free trade for products originating in their respective territories, with some exceptions. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 According to \cf3 Rosenthal (2005)\cf2 , the most obvious results of this regional integration process were expressed in the growth of intra-regional trade which increased from 30 million dollars in 1960 to 136 million in 1965 and rose successively to 286 million in 1970, 536 million in 1975 and, finally, to more than 1100 million in 1980. However, due to the mix-up of economic and political agents that participated in this process, the goals and objectives were not fulfilled, such as the conformation of a common external tariff due to the fact that Honduras suspended its activities from the integration process. Also, it was not possible to undertake the creation of the \'93integration industries\'94
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 5 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 due to the influence of the opposing interests of foreign capital and, in particular, of multinational companies. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In addition, the crisis of the 1980s, known as the \'93Debt Crisis\'94, was more serious in Central America because of the civil war that not only diverted investment incentives, but also led to the decline of intra-regional trade, agreements and instruments adopted to strengthen integration. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In 1980 several initiatives were established between the Central American Presidents to reactivate the conformation of the CACM process, and signed the \'93Declaration of San Jose\'94, with the aim of coordinating the actions of the Ministers and Deputy Ministers for restructuring the CACM. In the year 1988, Honduras proposed to study the possibility of multilateralizing the bilateral agreements they already had with the Member countries of the Central American Common Market, which, in fact, meant to request their return to the CACM. In 1990, it was agreed with an Economic Action Plan for Central America (PAECA), whose objectives were: (a) the restructuring, strengthening and reactivating of regional economic integration, (b) evolution for an integrated production system at a regional level, (c) delineation of the external debt problem and, (d) a better distribution of social costs and of necessary adjustment of economies. The signing of this agreement by the Presidents of Central America has resulted in a series of efforts directed toward strengthening the Central American integration. In 1993, the Protocol of the General Treaty on Central American integration was approved, whose goal was to reach the Central American Economic Union. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 From there on, the advancement in the liberalization of trade in the Central American market has been substantial, because practically all the products produced in the CACM have zero tax and more than 90% of the import record tariffs applied the same Common External Tax. When comparing the CACM with other regional integration processes, such as the MERCOSUR, the trading has been much more complicated due to conflicts between national interest and the Bloc\'92s standards (\cf3 Azevedo, 2003\cf2 ). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In recent years, the countries of Central America started making bilateral free trade negotiations with other countries, which are shown in Fig. A1, in the Appendix. Specifically in the case of Guatemala, several free trade agreements were signed (bilateral, in whole or partially) with Colombia (1980), Venezuela (1985), France (1988), Cuba (1999), Panama (1999), Chile (1999), Mexico (2000), and Taiwan (2005). Guatemala has also actively participated in various working groups of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) and has also signed several agreements for the protection and promotion of investment, particularly with France, in 1998. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 At the beginning of the year 1984, Guatemala also benefited from unilateral trade preferences granted by the United States, by the so-called \'93Caribbean Basin Initiative\'94 (CBI). The United States granted a unilateral tax free treatment of selected products that followed the \'93strict rules of origin\'94 and Guatemala took advantage of the trade preferences granted by the United States. Consequently, this explains a major proportion of export growth registered during the 1990s due to those standards. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The main effects of DR-CAFTA are the ability to diversify the export products basket of the country and thus achieve an expansion of trade levels; a profit derived from the \'93advantage of distance\'94,
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 6 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 an improvement of the investment climate, which allows a faster growth, and poverty reduction. The huge growth potential embedded in the DR-CAFTA is due to a combination of two complementary forces: the Treaty as a magnet for investment and as a catalyst for institutional change. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The New Economic Geography (NGE) is a field of study within the regional economy itself, but it is also a descendant of the theory of international trade, with the models featured increasing incomes of mobility and transport costs. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 According to \cf3 Brakman et al. (2005)\cf2 , with the NGE, began a shift in thought about the regional policy, which perhaps should not continue focusing on the outskirts lagging behind, but to channel funds to the local settlements that have a realistic opportunity to hold on to the economic activity. Companies and workers are subject to centripetal and centrifugal market forces and the location of the decisions depends on the balance of those forces that, in turn, depend on the cost of trade. The agglomeration of equilibrium is characterized by a salary structure. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The advantages of agglomeration materialize in higher wages in major regions. On the other hand, the causality of the selection is that the balance is circular, that is to say: first, that companies and workers prefer the central core, as it has the largest market and is home to many companies and workers. Therefore, if the agglomeration of balances is the rule, regional disparities are difficult to contract with traditional regional policy. Second, \cf3 Brakman et al. (2005) \cf2 say, the explanation is that the peripheral regions lack natural resources and institutional conditions to keep within the economic activity, so the regional policy can succeed temporarily to attract economic activity to the periphery, but in the long run, end in the central core. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf3 Venables (2003) \cf2 indicates that the spatial inequality in developing countries is due to the natural advantages of some regions in relation to others and to the presence of agglomeration forces, leading to the Group of activities. The presence of increasing returns to scale in the cities gives rise to urban structures that are not great in size. For \cf3 Ades and Glaeser (1994)\cf2 , the factors that explain the concentration of an urban population of a nation in a single city are the high taxes, high costs of internal trade and the low levels of international trade that increase the degree of concentration. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 According to \cf3 Ades and Glaeser (1994)\cf2 , countries with high GDP percentages and low trade barriers and tariffs for imports (including an intensity of a constant level), rarely have their population concentrated in one city. Urban centralization also falls into the development of transport networks. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf3 Wheaton and Shishido (1981) \cf2 and \cf3 Rosen and Resnick (1980) \cf2 argue that the urban concentration is negatively related to the country\'92s population. \cf3 Ades and Glaeser (1994) \cf2 are in complete agreement with \cf3 Krugman and Elizondo (1996) 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 hypothesis about the fact that the urban concentration is negatively related with international trade, because in the first place, commerce and cities are connected, although it may be that the urban concentrations are causing low levels of trade, contrary to the assumption that the low levels of trade lead to concentration. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 For \cf3 Brakman et al. (2005) \cf2 the program logic of the single market rests mainly on the exploitation of comparative advantage, resulting in a change of economic activity among the Member States in such a way that the location of the production is in accordance with the location of the factors of production. According to these authors, companies want to be where the biggest markets are and, in turn, the large markets, where many companies are located, so there is a \'93circular causation\'94 and free trade is crucial, where the intermediate levels of crowding tend to be stable. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 When trying to perform an empirical description of an urban system you can check the rank size rule called \'93rule of countries\'94. In the case of many countries, cities can be small, with successive larger cities that gradually come to be so. The result can be a function of the distribution of urban areas that are classified or sorted according to the size of each individual urban area, and which will tend to be induced to the left. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 According to \cf3 McCann (2001) \cf2 the extensive urban areas have crucial importance in the behavior and overall performance of the economy due to the presence of agglomerated economies. The result of this is that those urban and regional economies put a great emphasis on the behavior and performance of these larger urban groupings, which are relatively small in number. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Within the theories of urban growth in the economic literature, with an emphasis on regional economy, a way of explaining how these changes happen in city sizes is through \'93Zipf\'92s law\'94, which is used to refer to the idea that the size of cities follows a Pareto distribution. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 George Kingsley Zipf (1902\'961950)
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 7 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 improved the inspiring work of \cf3 Auerbach (1913)\cf2 , which proposes that the distributions of sizes of cities are much wider depending on the original idea of Pareto, but always keeping the original idea that the same has an exponent equal to 1. The same became known as Zipf\'92s law, which is simply the product of the population of any city multiplied by its position in the ordering of a region of the geographical territory and product that shall be equal to the population of the largest city. Therefore, the second-largest city has half the population, and the third will have a third, and so on. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf3 Monasterio (2004) \cf2 explains that, according to Zipf, there is a diversification force in the way in which the cities are distributed due to the location of the population in the vicinity of areas supplying raw materials as a means of minimizing costs and, another force, is unification of space, which derives from the minimization of transport cost of goods of final products to the consumer markets. These two agglomeration forces would be opposed. Diversification or centrifugal forces lead to an increasing number of cities with declining population, while the unified messaging or centripetal force leads to a smaller number of cities with growing population. As a result of the tension of the two forces the hierarchical system of cities can be deduced. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 According to Zipf\'92s considerations, this phenomenon makes it possible to have a linear relationship with regard to the relationship between the rank or the order of cities and its size. Thus, the size distribution of cities is determined by a Pareto distribution as follows (\cf3 Oliveira, 2004\cf2 ): 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 where the variable 
\i \cf2 x 
\i0 \cf2 indicates the population size of a given city; the variable 
\i \cf2 y 
\i0 \cf2 is the number of cities with a population greater than 
\i \cf2 x
\i0 \cf2 ; the coefficient 
\i \cf2 A 
\i0 \cf2 is the value of a constant and the Pareto exponent is \uc0\u945 . 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The original idea is born of a Pareto cumulative distribution, where the size of the population of a city is a random variable 
\i \cf2 X
\i0 \cf2 , with one act 
\i \cf2 x
\i0 \cf2 , such that the probability of discovering a city, less than 
\i \cf2 x 
\i0 \cf2 is given by a cumulative distribution function. Therefore, the probability of discovering a city with a population greater than 
\i \cf2 x 
\i0 \cf2 is given by: 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 If and getting the logarithms of Eq. \cf3 (2)\cf2 , the size of urban areas can be calculated by means of logarithmic 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 transformation econometrically:\uc0\u8232 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The model that will be estimated in this work is based on Eq. \cf3 (3) \cf2 and is prepared as follows: 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 where, 
\i \cf2 i 
\i0 \cf2 = 1, . . ., 
\i \cf2 n 
\i0 \cf2 represents the cities; 
\i \cf2 t 
\i0 \cf2 = 1921, 1950, 1964, 1981, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 and 2004 are the census dates and the periods in which the regression is estimated; 
\i \cf2 x 
\i0 \cf2 is the population of a specific city; 
\i \cf2 y 
\i0 \cf2 represents the number of cities with a population greater than the same 
\i \cf2 x
\i0 \cf2 . The constants or estimated model parameters are 
\i \cf2 A 
\i0 \cf2 and \uc0\u945  and, finally, \u949 
\i\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 it 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the error normally distributed with zero mean and constant variance \uc0\u963 
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn8 \uc0\u948 \cf2 \up10 2
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 . 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 According to \cf3 Monasterio (2004)\cf2 , to check the Zipf\'92s law, there is a requirement that \uc0\u945  is near \u8722 1. So, the crucial question about the empirical evidence of the size of the cities is: why, in any area, the number of large cities is low in relation to the number of small towns? 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In accordance with \cf3 Soo (2005)\cf2 , the Pareto exponent can be seen as a measure of inequality, the exponent to a higher value would have to understand how populations more equal in urban systems (in the limit \uc0\u945  = \u8734 , all cities have the same size). For \cf3 Brakman et al. (2003)\cf2 , the Zipf\'92s law holds if, and only if \uc0\u945  = 1, the largest city is 
\i \cf2 k 
\i0 \cf2 times larger (as the biggest city being 
\i \cf2 k
\i0 \cf2 ). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The \uc0\u945  signal should always be negative, because the greater the population of an urban center the lower the probability or the chance to find a city with a larger population. Additionally, for the higher the \u945  value, there is a small inequality for distribution of cities, and when \u945  
\f1 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  \uc0\u8734  all the cities in the region have the same size. In contrast, the smaller the \u945  value, there is great inequality in the distribution of the size of cities, and when \u945  
\f1 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  0 there is a full migration to the larger urban centers. Finally, \uc0\u945  = 1, you can check the rule of the order of the cities rules, where the parameter 
\i \cf2 A 
\i0 \cf2 the means the population of the largest urban centers in the region or country of study. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 To evaluate the possibility that there is a linear relationship between the order of cities, the following \cf3 Rosen and Resnick (1980) \cf2 model is proposed: 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 This modified version must evaluate the parameter \uc0\u946 , it means to evaluate the signal of the, so, if \u946  > 0, the curve that relates the order and size of the cities has a convex shape. Then, there is a larger population in the larger urban centers and smaller towns are more numerous in the original proposal known as Zipf\'92s law or the rule of the order of the cities size law. If \u946  < 0, the interpretation would be that the order and size of the cities has a concave shape where the biggest urban centers or cities are less populous and the smaller towns are less numerous. To conclude, if \u946  = 0, it turns out as Gibrat\'92s law, in which the evolution in the growth of a city is independent of its size. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The model proposed by the Bank of Guatemala aims to estimate the effect on the country\'92s economic growth rate, derived from the DR-CAFTA in 2006: 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 where, 
\f2 \uc0\u56319 \u56328 
\f0\i \cf2 GDP
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the rate of change in real GDP in the year 
\i \cf2 t
\i0 \cf2 ; 
\f2 \uc0\u56319 \u56328 
\f0\i \cf2 GDP
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t
\i0 \cf2 \dn3 \'961
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the rate of change in real GDP in the year 
\i \cf2 t
\i0 \cf2 \'961; 
\f2 \uc0\u56319 \u56328 
\f0\i \cf2 X
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the rate of change of the exports of goods in the year 
\i \cf2 t
\i0 \cf2 ; 
\f2 \uc0\u56319 \u56328 
\f0\i \cf2 M
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the rate of change of the importation of goods in year 
\i \cf2 t
\i0 \cf2 ; 
\f2 \uc0\u56319 \u56328 
\f0\i \cf2 DFI
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the rate of change in direct foreign investment in the year 
\i \cf2 t
\i0 \cf2 ; \uc0\u945 
\i\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 i 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 are the parameters to estimate (
\i \cf2 i
\i0 \cf2 =1, 2,...,5) \uc0\u949 
\i\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the error term. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 To measure the urban concentration the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) is used, which is built from the sum of the square of every town in the country\'92s urban population. This index is commonly used to measure the degree of concentration of markets in industrial economy and to estimate the degree of concentration of a variable is as follows: 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 where the population of a country is formed by 
\i \cf2 j
\i0 \cf2 =1,...,
\i \cf2 n 
\i0 \cf2 towns and cities in particular (
\i \cf2 P
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 J
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 ) and the total urban population of a country 
\i \cf2 P
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 tot
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 . If the index reaches a maximum value of 10,000, the value is completely concentrated in one city when the value tends to zero there is no concentration. So, when approaching zero, there is a greater weight in the medium and small localities. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Census data were obtained through the National Institute of Statistics (INE) of Guatemala, that belongs to the Direction of Censuses and Surveys in the records of the National Census of Population and Housing. The census data used corresponded to the urban populations of municipalities for the years 1921, 1950, 1964, 1973. 1981, 1994 and 2002. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The data of the censuses designed jointly by the INE and the Latin American Demographic Centre (CELADE) for the years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2003 and 2004 were also used. The data can be seen in \cf3 Table A1 \cf2 in the Appendix. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf3 Table 1 \cf2 shows the distribution of the Guatemalan population. It is seen that in the metropolitan region there are 3 cities over 100 thousand inhabitants and the smallest towns are in the Southeast and Northwest of the country. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The following will be exposed to the results of Eqs. \cf3 (4) and (5) \cf2 estimated by means of the statistical method known as Ordinary Least Squares (MQO).
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 8 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 The regressions obtained are presented in \cf3 Table 2 \cf2 and show that Zipf\'92s law is not the case. For the coefficient \uc0\u945  = \u8722 1.11 the hypothesis is rejected that \u945  = \'961. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In the following 20 years, the distribution of city sizes is more egalitarian until 1950, but then begins to become more unequal. This result is contrary to \cf3 Gabaix (1999) \cf2 explanations, which proposes that the order of the cities rule remain stable over time. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 For the Guatemalan economy, during the first half of the last century the economy was closed, and the economic activities were concentrated in the region of the Pacific coast or in cities located in the Central and Northwestern regions. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In accordance with the NGE, the increase in inequality is due to the centripetal forces acting and overriding the centrifugal force because as \cf3 Table 2 \cf2 shows, the Pareto coefficient is 0.85, therefore showing the supremacy of the central city. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Considering the extent of urban concentration through the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) in \cf3 Table A2 \cf2 in the Appendix, it turns out that it has been increasing since 1921 by 4.76 reaching a level of 16.66 in 1964, although it has fallen after that until reaching 7.41 in the year 2002. Apparently, the effect of the Central American Common Market (CACM) in the sixties favored the centrifugal forces. Thus, it turns out that the facts that \cf3 Krugman and Elizondo (1996) \cf2 reveal, in which urban concentration is negatively associated with international trade,
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 9 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is correct. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In Guatemala, there is no general railway network provision which allows an alternate means of transport, in spite of other ways than the carriage of goods by means of containers to customs and ports of entry. However, the creation of paved roads from 1935 linking several cities in the country and the capital of Guatemala caused a lower dependence on transport of goods by train. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The Pareto coefficient increased from \uc0\u8722 0.84 to \u8722 1.11 between 1935 and 1938, so the strength of diversification has grown significantly due to some roads built in the country. In 1959 the migration to Guatemala\'92s capital increased, reflecting the decrease in the Pareto coefficient of until \u8722 0.87, suggesting that the concentration forces of this period overlapped. Finally, the passenger transport by railways increased greatly until 1988. This may be another explanation for the increasing urban concentration and inequality between the cities.
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 10 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 This urbanization trend significantly has not reverted up to the present, because the Pareto coefficient has not changed significantly.
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 11 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Therefore, concluded that there is an inverse relationship between the importance and use of the railway stations to increase the Guatemalan highway network. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The results are also presented for three possible scenarios of Eq. \cf3 (4) \cf2 using only 13 major cities and the 100 largest (\cf3 Table A3 \cf2 in the Appendix). Comparing the Pareto coefficient of \uc0\u8722 0.7287 found by \cf3 Soo (2005) \cf2 for the year 1994 for a sample of 13 cities with the result that his work was \uc0\u8722 0.7324, we can infer that the distribution of cities in Guatemala has changed a lot and become more egalitarian than what was estimated by \cf3 Soo (2005)\cf2 . 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 For a sample of 100 cities, the coefficient goes to \uc0\u8722 1.1295 and we can see that the values of the Pareto coefficient are larger when restricted to 100 major cities, showing that the inequality between cities is lowest among the largest urban centers. In \cf3 Fig. 2\cf2 ,
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 12 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 below, it can be observed there is a decreasing function of the Pareto coefficient in the period 1950\'962002 for 13 major cities. When you analyze the 13 largest cities, inequality increases because the Pareto coefficient is smaller. Thus, the larger cities are not reaching a maximum level yet. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Doing the exercise for the 13 and the 100 largest cities which make up the upper portion of the distribution of the order of the cities using the estimation of Eq. \cf3 (5) \cf2 (see \cf3 Table A4 \cf2 in the Appendix), the results indicate that it complies with the Gibrat\'92s law. If all the cities are used, the results are ambiguous, as in many cases from 1973, Gibrat\'92s law, which indicates that there is an independence between the growth and the size of a city, or in other words, the Zipf\'92s law would be in its steady state. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The trade liberalization model was estimated from Eq. \cf3 (6)\cf2 . It is necessary to highlight that the model was estimated based on annual data from the period between the years of 1960 and 2006. In this sense, \cf3 Table 3 \cf2 below, presents the results obtained by using the reference year. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 To improve the effects DR-CAFTA in economic growth, we transformed Eq. \cf3 (6) \cf2 into:
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 By Eq. \cf3 (9) \cf2 it is possible to estimate the effect on 
\f2 \uc0\u56319 \u56328 
\f0\i \cf2 GDP
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t
\i0 \cf2 \dn3 +1 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 to a commercial opening due to a change in 
\i \cf2 w
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 , assuming that 
\i \cf2 w
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t
\i0 \cf2 \dn3 +1 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 remains constant. This effect can be calculated as follows: 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 It is also possible to calculate the effect of a unit increase in exports 
\i \cf2 X
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 , imports 
\i \cf2 M
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 and direct foreign investment 
\i \cf2 DFI
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 , respectively 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Thus, the effect on economic growth by a one percent increase in exports 
\i \cf2 X
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 , imports 
\i \cf2 M
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 and direct foreign investment 
\i \cf2 DFI
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 t 
\i0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 are in \cf3 Table 4\cf2 . 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 To verify economic growth for year of DR-CAFTA, some scenarios were developed considering the estimates for imports and exports made by the United States International Trade Commission (USITC) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). For foreign direct investment (DFI), we used the estimates made by the Bank of Guatemala (BANGUAT). The reader can see estimates in \cf3 Table 5\cf2 . 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Two scenarios were created to observe the economic growth per year of DR-CAFTA: the first considers the estimates for imports and exports made by the USITC, the second scenario considers IMF estimates. Estimates for the DFI are from BANGUAT. Additionally, the effects of an increase in imports, exports and foreign direct investment on GDP, made previously, are used in the scenarios (see \cf3 Table 4\cf2 ). The results of the scenarios on GDP can be checked in \cf3 Table 5\cf2 .
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 13 
\fs24 \cf2 \up0 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Comparing the results obtained with the BANGUAT (2006) calculations for the USITC, the estimated value in this work reaches half (0.24%) in comparison to the value of 0.48%. In the case of the IMF estimates, the estimated value in this work is less (0.49%) than 0.85%. The difference may be due to the sample period. In the case of the BANGUAT model, in the 1990\'962004 period, where the Guatemalan economy experienced a greater intensity of trade, and in the case of this study, it was in the longer period 1960\'962006 where it began a more open trade with the CACM. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 To determine the correlation between a commercial opening, as the life of a free-trade agreement, and the size of the correlation proof is: \'93the Pearson correlation coefficient\'94. To calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient, we used the following expression: r = \uc0\u963 
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 XY 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 /\uc0\u963 
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 X
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 \uc0\u963 
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 Y 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 , where \uc0\u963 
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf2 \dn3 XY 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the 
\i \cf2 X 
\i0 \cf2 and 
\i \cf2 Y 
\i0 \cf2 covariance from the quantitative variables. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 For the Guatemalan case, we used the Pareto coefficients for the 13 largest cities, 100 major cities and all cities, and the open trade index and terms of trade. The quantitative variables that were correlated are the Pareto coefficient (\uc0\u945 ) and the following indicators: (i) trade intensity ratio expressed as the sum of exports and imports divided between GDP: (X + M)/GDP; (ii) terms of trade (TIC); (iii) General GDP growth rate; (iv) percentage effect on the rate of GDP economic growth with the duration of a commercial opening; and (v) HHI that is the measure of urban concentration. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Analyzing each one of \cf3 Table 6 \cf2 correlation coefficients, then it is seen that in the case of correlation between trade intensity ratio and the Pareto coefficient in all three cases the relationship is positive. Soon, increasing the ratio of trade intensity, the Pareto coefficient must be greater, and therefore the distribution inequality in the size of the cities must be less. In the case of the 100 largest cities, the level of correlation is high, 0.83. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Considering the correlation between TIC
\fs21\fsmilli10667 \cf3 \up10 14 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 and the Pareto chart, there is a negative sign. So, when TIC increases, the Pareto coefficient decreases in a certain proportion. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Therefore, an increase or an improvement in terms of exchange would lead to an increase of the population\'92s capacity consumption, but also greater inequality in the urban centers, because centripetal forces would create a larger migration to urban centers, causing an increase in urban concentration and also a more extended local market to other manufacturing activities with the international market. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In the case of the correlation between GDP rate of change and the Pareto coefficient, the relationship is positive, whereas the three samples of cities and reaching 0.50 in the case of all cities is not. When changing the size of the sample, the correlation coefficient of the urban centers of large cities will tend to decrease their population due to the reduction of inequality. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 On the other hand, when one considers the correlation coefficient HHI and the Pareto coefficient for all cities, the coefficient reaches \uc0\u8722 0.35, that is, there is a negative relationship when urban concentration increases and the cities will be more unequal, migrating to the cities with the largest urban centers. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The objective of this work was to investigate empirically the impact of a free trade treaty on Guatemala\'92s economic growth and the size of the cities between 1921 and 2004. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The results obtained for the Pareto coefficient showed that there are no significant variations in the order of size of the cities between the censuses for the period 1921\'962004, because in the year 1921 the coefficient was relatively low, increased by the year 1950, which leads to the conclusion that the rule applies. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Therefore, there was an important change in the size of cities, during this period of almost 30 years, since the inequality in the size of the cities was significantly reduced, in which the centrifugal agglomeration forces were dominant. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 From the late sixties and in the middle of the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Pareto chart is reduced and centripetal agglomeration forces dominated and the cities were more likely to be more unequal. However, the results change when varying the size of the samples, that is, the Pareto coefficient relies heavily on the sample size. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 With the intention of measuring the relocation of the population in the urban space by calculating Gibrat\'92s law, the possibility might be considered that the growth of the cities is independent of their size, specifically in the period 1973\'962004 and that the growth of the cities has a convergent behavior or diverse difference. There is a clear trend toward the concentration of the economic activity in the major urban centers or intermediate cities. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The urban concentration measurement by HHI exhibited a fall between 1921 and 1950, coinciding with the Pareto coefficient. Soon, the forces of agglomeration dominated centrifugally and favored an increase in the size of the less populous cities. Already in 1964 due to the full duration of the CACM and high rates of GDP growth, urban concentration increased significantly. In the following years, the value of the index fell gradually until 2004. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 With respect to trade liberalization and size of the cities, it was found that the Pareto exponent is positively correlated with the ratio of trade intensity. For all cities, the value of the correlation coefficient was high, thus, increasing international trade, i.e. cities tend to be less unequal. Additionally, this result is supported by the HHI with positive value. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Finally, we found that the urban concentration had a negative relationship with international trade, since the urban concentration fell between 1964 and 2004 and trade increased intensity. With the full duration of the DR-CAFTA, it is possible to predict to what degree that urban concentration tends to increase the centrifugal forces, thus the increase of foreign trade and economic growth. 
\fs24 \cf2 \
}