{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red224\green224\blue224;
\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c100000;\cssrgb\c90196\c90196\c90196;
\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
City size distributions and the underlying city size dynamics have received considerable attention in the urban economic literature in recent years. Empirical studies have in particular produced evidence with respect to three features of city size distributions. First, city size distributions are found to be remarkably stable over time. Second, the hierarchy of the individual cities making up these distributions is also often rather stable, which suggests proportionate city growth, see for example \cf3 Eaton and Eckstein (1997) \cf2 and \cf3 Black and Henderson (2003)\cf2 . The third stylized fact is that city size distributions are very well approximated by a power law in the upper tail of the distribution. A special case of which is better known as Zipf's Law and has been found to hold for various countries at various points in time, see e.g. \cf3 Soo (2005) \cf2 and \cf3 Nitsch (2005)\cf2 . \
These empirical regularities have stimulated the development of city growth models that can explain these features of city size distributions in a coherent economic framework. Modern theories (e.g. \cf3 Eeckhout, 2004; Rossi-Hansberg and Wright, 2007; C\'f3rdoba, 2008\cf2 ) try to explain the evolution of city size distributions in a way that is consistent with the empirical results. Either a stable city size distribution adhering to Zipf's Law in the upper tail follows directly from the model (\cf3 Gabaix, 1999; Eeckhout, 2004\cf2 ), or it is one of the possible outcomes of the model (\cf3 Rossi-Hansberg and Wright, 2007\cf2 ). These models have benefited substantially from the work of \cf3 Gabaix (1999) \cf2 who, building on earlier work by \cf3 Simon (1955)\cf2 , showed that a stable city size distribution adhering to Zipf's Law in the upper tail naturally results if the individual city size growth process adheres to what is essentially Gibrat's Law of proportional effect, i.e. a city's expected growth rate and the variance of that growth rate are independent of its initial size (also referred to as proportionate city growth). The whole city size distribution would in that case be lognormal (see \cf3 Eeckhout, 2004\cf2 ).\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 \
Recent empirical papers on the evolution of the city size distribution focus exclusively on the US experience, e.g. \cf3 Black and Henderson (2003)\cf2 , \cf3 Overman and Ioannides (2001)\cf2 , \cf3 Ioannides and Overman (2003, 2004)\cf2 , \cf3 Dobkins and Ioannides (2000, 2001)\cf2 , or \cf3 Eeckhout (2004)\cf2 . Besides some simple Zipf studies that do not look at distributional dynamics nor at evidence for Gibrat's Law of proportional effect, the only two papers we know of that offer a thorough look at the distributional dynamics of city size distributions for other countries than the USA are \cf3 Eaton and Eckstein (1997) \cf2 and \cf3 Anderson and Ge (2005)\cf2 . The former provides evidence for France and Japan confirming the notion of a stable city size distribution, while the latter shows that in case of China the city size distribution has been affected in a predictable way by government policies. \
The contributions of the present paper are the following. First, we examine the evolution of the city size distribution for West- Germany (from now on referred to as Germany). The interest in the German city size distribution can be dated back to as early as 1913 when the geographer \cf3 Auerbach (1913)\cf2 , as one of the first, noted that the city size distribution could be approximated by a power law. For our empirical analysis we have constructed a unique data set of annual city population data for 62 of the largest cities in Germany over the period 1925\'961999. This data set allows us to describe the evolution of the German city size distribution quite accurately. Second, the use of German data provides a specific empirical view on the evolution of the city size distribution, namely it offers a (unique) look at the effect of large shocks to the urban system. In the time period under consideration German cities were subject to a number of large \'91quasi-natural experiments\'92 namely the heavy destruction of cities during WWII and the split and subsequent reunification of Germany. Our data set allows us to look at the impact of these \'91quasi-natural experiments\'92 in a much more dynamic fashion than previous research on the same topic (\cf3 Davis and Weinstein, 2002; Bosker et al., 2007; Redding and Sturm, 2005; Redding, Sturm, and Wolf, 2007\cf2 ). Third, our annual data set allows us to perform unit root tests for each individual city in order to find evidence on Gibrat's Law of proportional effect.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 The present paper is among the first to provide (panel) unit root tests for cities that, given our extensive data set, arguably suffer less from low power problems that beset unit root tests based on a limited number of observations, while at the same time adequately controlling for the short-run dynamics in city size. \
The results of our analysis of the German urban system can also help to distinguish between some of the proposed urban economic theories that try to explain the shape and evolution of city size distributions. Following \cf3 Davis and Weinstein (2002)\cf2 , these theories can be grouped into three broad categories, i.e. increasing returns to scale, random growth and locational fundamentals.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 The models in all three categories predict a stable city size distribution in equilibrium; the reaction to shocks is however quite different. Models exhibiting increasing returns to scale can give rise to a stable distribution which is sensitive to shocks and which does not necessarily adhere to Zipf's Law (see also Chapter 12 of \cf3 Fujita et al., 1999; Gabaix and Ioannides, 2004; Brakman et al., 1999\cf2 ). As a result a large shock has the potential to (radically) change the city size distribution. Models falling under the random growth category, e.g. \cf3 Gabaix (1999) \cf2 or \cf3 C\'f3rdoba (2008)\cf2 , predict that shocks have a permanent effect on city sizes, but given that these shocks are distributed randomly over cities and mean- and variance independent of city size, they will in the limit result in a city size distribution that adheres to Zipf's Law in the upper tail. The effect of a large shock thus has no effect on the limiting city size distribution; it can however have a permanent impact on the relative position of cities within the distribution. Finally, the locational fundamentals approach suggests that the observed city size distribution is the result of fixed underlying locational fundamentals (first nature geography). A large shock will now result in both the city size distribution as a whole and the relative position of cities within this distribution returning to their pre-shock state.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 Given the three categories' different reaction to large shocks, the \'91quasi-natural experiments\'92 that the German urban system was subjected to, provide a way to try and distinguish between competing views of city size evolution. \
Our first main finding is that the German city size distribution is permanently affected by the World War II shock, more so than by any other shocks. Cities that have been hit relatively hard due to the substantial bombings and the subsequent allied invasion do not recover the loss in relative size. After the war, the city size distribution does not revert to its pre-WWII level, but shifts to one characterized by a more even distribution of population over the cities in the sample. Compared to the impact of WWII, the separation from and later reunion with East-Germany has had a much less severe impact on relative city sizes. Our second finding is that, once corrected for the heavy destruction during WWII, (panel) unit root tests that are used to test for the validity of \cf2 \cb4 proportionate city growth reject Gibrat's Law for about 75% of all cities. Also we find strong evidence that the locational fundamentals approach does not seem to explain the evolution of Germany's urban system, which is in contrast to the findings of \cf3 Davis and Weinstein (2002, 2004) \cf2 for Japan. Overall the evidence does seem to comply best with urban theories exhibiting increasing returns to scale. \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb4 In constructing our data set, we first had to choose which cities to include in our sample. We choose to include those West- German cities in our data set that either had a population of over 50,000 inhabitants before the beginning of WWII or cities that were over the sample period classified as Gro\'dfst\'e4dte, cities with a population of at least 100,000 people. Cities are defined on a city-proper or administrative basis in Germany. Adjustments to the administrative boundaries (and hence size) of some cities were made during our sample period due to metropolitan developments but we were able to correct for the most significant of these changes (see Appendix A for more information on the city selection criteria and the boundary adjustments made). This selection process initially resulted in 81 cities, the same sample of West-German cities as used in \cf3 Brakman et al. (2004) \cf2 and \cf3 Bosker et al. (2007)\cf2 . In those two studies the only requirement to be included in the analysis was that for each city, population data had to be available for the years 1939, 1946 and 1963 (and possibly 1933). In the present study, however, we only include cities for which we have annual population data for each year in the 1925\'961999 period. In total 16 of the 81 West-German cities in our sample did not meet this requirement and for 3 cities we were unable to adequately correct for changes in their administrative border. We are therefore left with a data set that consists of 62 West-German cities over the period (Appendix A lists the cities included in our sample). The 19 cities that were dropped from our analysis were mostly relatively small. Since our main point of interest will be the upper tail of the city size distribution it can be argued that their exclusion does not matter too much for our analysis. \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 As to the decision to focus on West-German cities only, there are two main reasons to exclude East-German cities, that is to say cities that were part of the German Democratic Republic (GDR). The first reason is simply data availability. For most of the cities concerned there are too many missing observations during the GDR-period. The second and more fundamental reason is that (see \cf3 Brakman et al., 2004\cf2 ) cities in the GDR were not part of the kind of urban system that lies at the heart of all urban location theories where economic agents are free to choose their location. On the contrary, in the centrally planned economy of the GDR, firms and workers were not free to move between cities. In our view this has the implication that any testing of the stability or any other feature of the pan-German city size distribution is not very useful during our sample period. Obviously, this does not imply that we are not concerned with the split between West and East Germany or the subsequent reunification, but we will deal with this from the perspective of West-German cities only. Finally, with respect to the length of the sample period one could argue that it may be worthwhile to include population data for the pre-1925 period as well so as to be able to deal with for instance the WWI shock. For some cities in our sample we have population data that go as far back as 1871, but the number of cities with annual pre-1925 data is rather small so we decided to take 1925 as our cut-off date. \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 We start our analysis by giving a description of the evolution of the West-German urban system. \cf3 Table 1 \cf2 below shows that during our sample period total population increased by about 70% from about 39 million people in 1925 to 67 million in 1999. \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 During the same period, the share of Germany's population living in one of our sample cities declined by about 32% (or 13 ppt) suggesting a process of suburbanization over the sample period. The average city size in our sample increased by 16% from 258000 in 1925 to 300000 inhabitants but it has been quite stable from 1955 onwards. Comparing the development of mean city size to that of the median city size, which increased by 42%, the impression comes to the fore that smaller cities grew faster than the larger cities in our sample, hinting at a transition towards a more equally spread population over the cities in our sample. The impact of WWII also clearly shows up from \cf3 Table 1\cf2 . Whereas total West-German population increased by about 11% \cf2 \cb1 between 1935 and 1945, the average population of the cities in our sample decreased by over 20%, indicating that the urban population in particular suffered substantial losses during WWII. \
Before going into the analysis of the evolution of the German city size distribution and in order to fix ideas, \cf3 Fig. 1 \cf2 shows the distribution\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 for both the beginning (= 1925) and the end (= 1999) of our sample period. Also included in the figure are the city size distributions right at the start (=1939) and at the end (=1945) of WWII. In order to control for the changes in mean city size (see \cf3 Table 1\cf2 ), we normalized city sizes for each year by dividing each city's population by the mean city size in the same year. \
These kernel estimates of the city size distribution already reveal several interesting facts about the evolution of the German urban system. The first observation is that in the pre-WWII period from 1925\'961939 the distribution remained remarkably stable; the two distributions overlap almost exactly.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 The second observation concerns the impact of WWII. The massive loss in urban population suffered during the war (see \cf3 Table 1\cf2 ) induced a clear shift in the German city size distribution in a period of only 6 years. Comparing the 1945 distribution with the 1939 distribution, one can see that the main impact of the war is that the city size distribution loses mass in the lower tail and gains substantial mass in the middle. Keeping in mind that we are looking at the distribution of normalized city sizes this movement indicates that during the war the largest cities' population grew slower (or maybe more appropriate, considering the war destruction, declined more) than that of the smaller cities in our sample. Finally, the last interesting point to make about these kernel estimations is that in the period after the war the city size distribution does not revert to its pre-war state; instead the movement that was initiated during the war seems to propagate itself with the distribution gaining even more mass in the middle and losing mass in the lower tail. \
As a first glance at the dynamics within the distribution over our sample period, \cf3 Fig. 2 \cf2 plots cities' initial against cities' final rank within the city size distribution for the pre-WWII, the WWII, the post-WWII and the total sample period. \cf3 Table 2 \cf2 complements this by providing the cities that made the largest rank movement up and the largest rank movement down within the city size distribution respectively, as well as the absolute rank movement of the average city and the standard deviation of the average city's (absolute) rank movement within the city size distribution. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Fig. 2 \cf2 and \cf3 Table 2 \cf2 clearly show that cities' intradistributional rank movements were considerably lower before WWII than during or after the war, conveying the same message of a major impact of the war on the urban landscape in Germany. Also the magnitude of the change in rank of the winner and the loser increases considerably during and after WWII. Over the whole sample period the average city moves four places up or down in the city size distribution. Interestingly, rank changes are more frequent (and larger) for smaller cities, which reflects the fact that the population differences between smaller cities are generally smaller so that a given population in- or decrease will more easily result in a rank change. Taken together, \cf3 Table 2 \cf2 and \cf3 Figs. 1 and 2 \cf2 suggest that both the movement of the distribution as a whole as well as the relative position of cities within the distribution are of importance. \
To take a closer look at the (intra-)distributional dynamics suggested by \cf3 Fig. 1 \cf2 and \cf3 Table 2\cf2 , we now turn to the estimation of the movement of the city size distribution over the sample period. In order to do so, we use Markov chain techniques following \cf3 Dobkins and Ioannides (2000)\cf2 , \cf3 Black and Henderson (2003) \cf2 and \cf3 Eaton and Eckstein (1997)\cf2 . These techniques quantify the dynamics of the city size distribution as a whole based on the intradistributional dynamics of the individual cities that make up this distribution. The use of Markov chain techniques requires the quantification of the distribution by discretizing it, i.e. each city is assigned to one of a predetermined number of groups based on its relative size. Letting f\cf2 \dn3 t \cf2 \up0 denote the vector of the resulting discretized distribution at period t and assuming that the distribution follows a homogenous, stationary, first order Markov process, the distributional dynamics can be characterized by the following Markov chain, \
where M is the so-called x-period transition matrix that maps the distribution at period t into period t + x. Each element m\cf2 \dn3 ij \cf2 \up0 in the transition matrix represents the probability that a city makes a move within the discretized distribution from group i in period t to group j in period t + x. To discretize the city size distribution, we allocate each city to one of five groups based on its relative size. This requires the definition of the cut-off points that determine which city belongs to which group. Following \cf3 Eaton and Eckstein (1997) \cf2 and \cf3 Quah (1993)\cf2 , we choose cut-off points exogenously and at city sizes of 0.25, 0.5, and times the average city size, \uc0\u956  \cf2 \dn3 t\cf2 \up0 , for a given year t.\cf3 \up10  \cf3 \up0 Table 3 \cf2 shows the resulting discretized distributions for the same years as for which \cf3 Fig. 1 \cf2 shows the kernel estimates of the entire empirical city size distribution. \
Even though the distributions are substantially simplified by the discretization, the afore-mentioned pattern of stability before WWII and a shift towards the middle of the distribution during the war shows up in \cf3 Table 3\cf2 . \
Having discretized the distribution, we can now turn to the estimation of the transition matrix, M. As we have yearly population data we choose to estimate the 1-year (x=1) transition matrix. Each transition probability, m\cf2 \dn3 ij\cf2 \up0 , in the transition matrix M is estimated by maximum likelihood along with its standard error, \uc0\u963 \cf2 \up2 b\cf2 \dn3 mij\cf2 \up0 , i.e. \
where n\cf2 \dn3 it,jt + 1 \cf2 \up0 denotes the number of cities moving from group i in year t to group j in year t + 1, n\cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 the number of cities in group i in year t, and . Using Eq. (2) we estimate the 1-year transition matrix for the pre-WWII period, the 6-year transition matrix during WWII (1939\'961945) and the 1-year transition matrix for the post-WWII period. \
\cf3 Tables 4\'966 \cf2 show the corresponding estimates of these matrices. The diagonal elements of the 1-year transition matrices before (\cf3 Table 4\cf2 ) and after (\cf3 Table 6\cf2 ) the war are close to one, which indicates that the city size distribution does not change dramatically over a \cf2 \cb4 period of 1 year. It is very interesting to note however that where before WWII all off-diagonal elements are not significantly different from zero, this changes after WWII when almost all off-diagonal elements are significantly different from zero. This significant off- diagonal movement indicates less stability of the distribution after the war, which complies with the visual inspection of \cf3 Fig. 1\cf2 . The magnitude and direction of this significant movement after the war can also be inferred when looking at the difference between the upper and lower off-diagonal entries of the transition matrix. This shows that most movement occurs from the smallest cities and, be it a lot smaller in magnitude, from the largest cities towards the middle of the distribution. This movement can be seen as evidence of a tendency of the distribution to gain mass in the middle indicating a city size distribution with more cities of medium size. \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb4 Next we turn to the impact of WWII on the German city size distribution. \cf3 Table 1 \cf2 already showed that the German urban population suffered a substantial loss during the war with a decrease of more than 10%. In turn the WWII-transition matrix in \cf3 Table 5 \cf2 shows the effect of this loss of urban population on the distribution in our sample. The most striking result is that 75% of the cities in the smallest category in 1939 made the transition to the 2nd to smallest category during the war period, indicating that the smallest cities suffered substantially less than the average city during the war. Second in magnitude is the finding that 20% of the cities in the middle category moved one category down to the 2nd to smallest group, indicating that small\'96medium sized cities suffered quite substantial losses during the war. Not a single city in the highest category shifts to a lower category due to the destruction during the war, this however does not indicate that these cities were not hit very hard during the war, it merely reflects the fact that these cities were very large before the war and the substantial loss of population during the war was not large enough to make them shift to a lower category in the discretized distribution. \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 Besides the fact that the transition matrices themselves are of interest, one can also use them to do interesting thought experiments (see initially \cf3 Ioannides and Overman, 2004\cf2 , but also \cf3 Black and Henderson, 2003; Eaton and Eckstein, 1997\cf2 ). Using our estimated pre- and post-WWII-transition matrices we ask ourselves the following questions: \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 1. Assuming WWII would not have happened and the transition matrix remained as in the pre-WWII period, what would the city size distribution have looked like in 1945 and 1999? \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 2. Assuming that the estimated transition matrix remained as during the pre-WWII (post-WWII) period, would the city size distribution converge and if so what would it look like in the steady state? \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 To answer the first question, we use the estimated pre-WWII transition matrix from \cf3 Table 4 \cf2 and the observed distribution in 1925 from \cf3 Table 3 \cf2 to predict the distribution in 1945 and 1999, using the following formula, \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb4 \up5  \cf2 \cb4 \up0 where f\cf2 \cb4 \up8 b \cf2 \cb4 \up0 is the distribution x years from the observed distribution in year 1925 and M\cf2 \cb4 \up8 b \up10 x \cf2 \cb4 \up0 is the pre-WWII transition matrix \cf2 \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cf2 \cb4 multiplied x times by itself, e.g. Column 1 and column 3 of \cf3 Table 7 \cf2 below give the resulting predicted distributions for 1945 and 1999 (taking x=20 or 74) respectively. \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb4 Comparing these two with the actual observed distributions for these years in \cf3 Table 3\cf2 , we see that for 1945 the main difference between the predicted\'97as if WWII did not happen\'97distribution and the actual distribution is found in the smallest two groups. The smallest group is predicted much too large, about 200% as large as observed and the second smallest group much too small, about 25% that of which observed. Comparing the actual and predicted\'97as if WWII did not happen\'97distribution for 1999, one sees a continuation of this pattern with the smallest group being predicted 10 times as large as observed and the second smallest group predicted at about two thirds the actual size. This confirms the notion that during WWII the smallest cities in the distribution grew faster, or better suffered a lower loss of population, than the average German city, and a continuation of this pattern after the war. \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb4 The same conclusion can be drawn from our second thought experiment: what would happen to the city size distribution if it continued to evolve as estimated by either the 1-year pre-WWII or 1-year post-WWII transition matrix? If one is willing to accept this continuation assumption, these limiting distributions are shown in columns 3 and 4 for the pre-WWII and the post-WWII case respectively.\cf3 \cb4 \up10  \cf2 \cb4 \up0 The pre-WWII limiting distribution is not that informative because it assigns zero mass to the two smallest groups, which is due to the fact that the pre-WWII transition matrix gives zero probability to a city in one of the three highest categories to make the transition to one of the two smallest categories (see \cf3 Table 4\cf2 ). As cities in the two smallest groups do eventually transfer to \cf2 \cb1 the higher categories, this will in the limit result in an emptying of these two categories. It does however suggest a movement towards a city size distribution characterized by medium\'96large cities. The limiting distribution based on the transition matrix after the war gives a completely different picture, namely that of a city size distribution characterized by small\'96medium sized cities, i.e. a more equal spreading of population over the urban landscape. \
The overall impression from the above analysis of both the intradistributional and distributional dynamics of the German city size distribution is that WWII did have a substantial direct and lasting effect on the German urban landscape.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 In the Introduction of our paper we stated that theories on urban growth could be distinguished according to their prediction regarding the stability of the city size distribution to shocks. Based on the evidence presented in this section our conclusion is that the (evolution of the) German (i.e. West-German) city size distribution during the period 1925\'961999 has been sensitive to the WWII shock\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 both in terms of the city size distribution as a whole as the relative position of cities within the distribution. So far our analysis has been largely descriptive however, in the remainder of our paper we will therefore turn from describing the evolution of the city size distribution to providing empirical tests that allow us to distinguish more properly between the three competing theories mentioned in the introduction. \
As already mentioned in the Introduction, the notion of a power law distribution describing the upper tail of city size distribution goes at least as far back as 1913 when the German geographer \cf3 Auerbach (1913) \cf2 noted this to be the case for Germany. The empirical literature has mainly focused on a special case of such a power law, namely that of city sizes in the upper tail of the distribution being distributed Pareto with coefficient a = 1.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 This empirical regularity is better known as Zipf\'92s Law (see \cf3 Zipf, 1949\cf2 ) and has been found to hold approximately for many countries over several years (see e.g. \cf3 Soo, 2005 and Nitsch, 2005\cf2 ).\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 The studies that test for Zipf's Law mainly do so by means of a Zipf regression, that is regressing the log of cities' rank r within the distribution on the log of city sizes. If city sizes are indeed distributed according to a power law it can be easily shown (see e.g. \cf3 Eeckhout, 2004\cf2 ) that the rank of a particular city i in this distribution is given by: \
where S\cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 is the size of city i, S\cf2 \dn3 o \cf2 \up0 is a (arbitrary) minimum city size, and N the number of cities above this truncation point. Testing for Zipf's Law can now be done by a regression of ln(r) on ln(S) in order to estimate the so-called Zipf coefficient, i.e. rewriting Eq. (4) in logs gives: \
where is a constant and \uc0\u949 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 a random error term. If it cannot be rejected that the estimated \'e2 equals 1 this \
constitutes evidence in favor of Zipf's Law. We estimated Eq. (5) using OLS for all years in our sample separately: \
where we add \uc0\u8722 0.5 to all city ranks following the recommendation in \cf3 Gabaix and Ibragimov (2007)\cf2 . This ensures that we get unbiased estimates of a. \cf3 Fig. 3 \cf2 below shows the results for a and its corresponding 5% confidence interval corresponding to the estimated OLS standard error of a\cf2 \up2 b\cf2 \up0 , \uc0\u963 \cf2 \up2 b\cf2 \dn3 a\cf2 \up0 , for each of the years in our sample.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Fig.3 \cf2 shows that during the pre-WWII period the point estimate of a is very close to 1. The impact of WWII also shows clearly when looking at the Zipf-regression results. The estimated Zipf coefficient, \'e2, increases from 1.09 in 1939 to about 1.16 right after the war, again confirming the notion of a more equal spread of urban population over the West-German cities in our sample due to the relative lower loss of urban population of smaller cities during WWII. In the post-WWII period the point estimate shows no return to 1, instead it steadily increases, finally reaching a point estimate of 1.20 in 1999. \
These results are consistent with the idea that WWII has had a major impact, shocking the city size distribution from one adhering closely to Zipf's Law to one characterized by a more equal spread of urban population over the different cities. This immediate impact of the war is not reversed in the post-WWII period, instead the distribution moves to one characterized by an even more equal spread of urban population. This confirms our earlier findings in the previous section based on the Markov chain analysis. Note however that this post-WWII tendency to a more equal spreading of urban population in the post-WWII period is also found for other developed countries (see e.g. \cf3 Soo, 2005; Nitsch, 2005\cf2 ). The striking finding in case of Germany is that WWII has had a non-trivial contribution to this process. \
\cf3 Gabaix (1999) \cf2 and also \cf3 Eeckhout (2004) \cf2 opened up an alternative way to empirically verify the relevance of Zipf's Law for a particular city size distribution. Here we follow \cf3 Gabaix (1999) \cf2 who showed that if individual city size growth adheres to Gibrat's Law of proportional effect, i.e. if city sizes grow randomly with the same expected growth rate and the same variance independent of city size, and is also subject to a lower reflective boundary (where smaller cities that hit the boundary from above are \'91bounced back upward\'92), the city size distribution converges to one adhering to Zipf's Law. It is the combination of a random walk process with a lower reflective boundary that gives a Pareto distribution with a coefficient of one, i.e. Zipf's Law. Without this lower reflective boundary, the city size distribution as a whole would in this case be log-normally distributed (see \cf3 Eeckhout, 2004\cf2 ).\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 As already briefly mentioned in the introduction, the fact that proportionate city growth gives rise to a lognormal city size distribution is also frequently referred to as Gibrat's Law (see e.g. \cf3 Sutton, 1997; Eeckhout, 2004\cf2 ). To avoid confusion, whenever we refer to Gibrat's Law from now on, we mean, as most authors in the modern city size distribution literature (see e.g. \cf3 Gabaix, 1999; Gabaix and Ioannides, 2004\cf2 , or \cf3 Black and Henderson, 2003\cf2 ), Gibrat's Law of proportional effect. \cf3 Gabaix's (1999) \cf2 contribution, showing that Gibrat's Law combined with a lower reflective boundary leads to Zipf's Law in (the upper tail of) the overall city size distribution, provides a link with the results we showed in the previous section. In the next sections we look for empirical evidence on Gibrat's Law using both non-parametric and parametric techniques. \
\cf3 Ioannides and Overman (2003) \cf2 and \cf3 Eeckhout (2004) \cf2 resort to non-parametric multivariate kernel estimations to shed empirical light on the relevance Gibrat's Law. Both papers find considerable evidence in favor of Gibrat's Law in case of the US urban system. Following this methodology, we plot the distribution of five-year city size growth rates conditional on initial city size (in logs) for the total, pre-WWII, post-WWII and WWII period along with the corresponding contour plots.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 The results are shown in \cf3 Fig. 4\cf2 a\'96d below. By taking any point, say S, on the city size axis and taking the cross-section through the kernel estimate parallel to the city size growth rate axis, one obtains the distribution of five-year growth rates conditional on the log of initial city size being S. \
The plotted kernel in \cf3 Fig. 4\cf2 a shows that before WWII, German city size growth behaved remarkably well according to Gibrat's Law: the estimated kernel and corresponding contour plot show no significant difference in the conditional growth rate distribution for cities of different size. This provides evidence that the growth rate of the cities in our sample in the pre-WWII period did not depend on the initial size of the city. It is interesting to relate these results to our estimated Zipf regression. The fact that before WWII individual city growth seems to adhere quite well to Gibrat's Law corresponds nicely to the finding of a Zipf coefficient very close to 1 during that period (see \cf3 Fig. 3\cf2 ). \
After WWII, the evidence from the estimated stochastic kernel and contour plot in \cf3 Fig. 4\cf2 c shows a completely different picture. For the largest cities in our sample city growth rates still seem largely independent of initial city size. This does not hold true for the smaller cities in our sample however. \cf3 Fig. 4\cf2 c shows clear evidence that the smaller cities in our sample grow on average faster than the larger cities. This shift in the mean of the conditional distribution for smaller cities is most clearly seen from the contour plot, which makes a significant shift to the right for the smallest cities. The evidence for Gibrat's Law is thus weaker for the post-WWII period, reflecting itself in the higher Zipf coefficient in \cf3 Fig. 3\cf2 . \
Before turning to the overall picture of individual German city growth over the whole sample period from 1925\'961999, we turn to the immediate impact of WWII on German city sizes. As can be seen in \cf3 Fig. 4\cf2 b, the largest cities suffered more heavily during the 6-year period of WWII. Smaller cities suffered less on average but the variance of city growth during the war also increases substantially for the smaller cities in the sample. This suggests that larger cities were not only damaged more heavily, the destruction of these larger cities was also less variable; or put differently, the larger cities were all hit quite similarly and more heavily compared to the smaller cities in our sample (evidence of the success of the Area Bombing-tactics of Allied Bomber Command aimed at destroying Germany's urban centers, see \cf3 Brakman et al., 2004\cf2 ). \
Combining \cf3 Fig. 4\cf2 a\'96c, the estimated stochastic kernel for the whole sample period in \cf3 Fig. 4\cf2 d does not provide very clear evidence that Gibrat's Law holds. The effect of the lesser destruction of smaller cities during WWII, and the higher growth rates of these same smaller cities after the war, dominates the equal growth rates before the war. As a result, the overall picture shows a similar (be it somewhat smaller) shift in the conditional growth rate distribution for the smaller cities in the sample as for the post-WWII case. This result of a size dependent mean growth rate, and a more or less initial size independent variance contrasts to empirical studies done using US city size data. Both \cf3 Eeckhout (2004) \cf2 and \cf3 Ioannides and Overman (2003) \cf2 find evidence for the USA of a more or less size independent mean growth rate and an increasing variance for smaller cities, which can be reconciled with the decreasing Zipf coefficient they find for the USA. The explanation of the higher Zipf coefficient found in our sample over the post- WWII period is a more equal spreading of urban population over the cities in Germany and not so much an increased variance of city growth for smaller cities. \
The non-parametric kernel estimates of the previous section remain largely based on pooled panel data evidence. In order to fully exploit the time series dimension of our data set, we now turn to a, more dynamic way of testing for Gibrat's Law. Given the many observations over time in our data set, we follow the suggestion made by \cf3 Gabaix and Ioannides (2004) \cf2 who state: "Hence one can imagine that the next generation of city size evolution empirics could draw from the sophisticated econometric literature on unit roots" (\cf3 Gabaix and Ioannides, 2004\cf2 , pp. 20). \
\cf3 Clark and Stabler (1991) \cf2 were one of the first to notice that Gibrat's Law can be tested using unit root tests. Following their exposition of the relationship between Gibrat's Law and unit root testing, assume that the size of city i at time t, can be related to the size of that same city at time t\uc0\u8722 1 according to the following formula: \
where \uc0\u947 \cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 denotes the growth rate of city i over the period t\uc0\u8722 1 to t. Next assume that this growth rate can be decomposed into three components, a random component \u949 \cf2 \dn3 it\cf2 \up0 , a non-stochastic component relating the current growth rate to a (possibly time-varying) constant, past growth rates and initial city size: \
where K\cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 is a possibly time-varying constant, and \uc0\u948 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 and \uc0\u946 \cf2 \dn3 ij \cf2 \up0 are parameters measuring the relative importance of initial city size and past growth rates on current city growth respectively and \uc0\u949 \cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 is a random error term. Now Gibrat's Law would require \uc0\u948 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 = 0, such that initial city size does not influence the growth of a particular city. In order to be able to test for this, substitute Eq. (8) into \
Eq. (7), take logs and subtract lnS\cf2 \dn3 it \uc0\u8722  1 \cf2 \up0 from both sides of the equation to obtain the following estimatable equation: \
where and the following approximate equality is used:\cf2 \dn3  \cf2 \up0 for small values of \uc0\u949 \cf2 \dn3 it\cf2 \up0 . This shows immediately that testing for Gibrat's Law amounts to testing for a unit root in city sizes. If we find that \uc0\u961 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 is not significantly different from zero, i.e. a unit root in city size, this constitutes evidence in favor of city i's growth rate being independent of city i's size. On the other hand an estimated \uc0\u961 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 smaller than zero would indicate that the evolution of city i is a stationary process implying that city i's growth rate declines with initial city size. \
There are to date very few studies that actually perform unit root tests on individual city sizes. Notable exceptions are \cf3 Clark and Stabler (1991)\cf2 , \cf3 Black and Henderson (2003) \cf2 and \cf3 Sharma (2003)\cf2 . \cf3 Clark and Stabler (1991) \cf2 conclude in favor of the relevance of Gibrat's Law based on the evolution of the city sizes of the seven largest Canadian cities over the period 1975\'961984. As the ADF unit root tests are infamous for their small-sample properties, a sample period of only 10 years seems to put a substantial doubt on their results.\cf3 \up10  \cf3 \up0 Black and Henderson (2003) \cf2 find no evidence for Gibrat's Law using data on the US metropolitan areas when testing for a unit root in city sizes. As \cf3 Clark and Stabler (1991) \cf2 they also have only 10 observations over time (decade-by-decade city sizes over a total period of 90 years). They take explicit note of the hereby potentially induced small-sample problem and resort to a recently proposed panel unit root test, i.e. \cf3 Levin et al. (2002)\cf2 . Given their very large cross-section dimension, the use of this panel technique is likely to solve the problems associated with the small-sample bias. However as noted by \cf3 Gabaix and Ioannides (2004)\cf2 , their test does not correct for the potential autocorrelation in the residuals, which can severely bias the results regarding the unit root hypothesis and thus regarding the relevance of Gibrat's Law. Furthermore they do not control for cross-sectional dependence across the cities in the panel, which sheds further econometric doubt on the robustness of their results. Using Indian population data for the period 1901\'961990, \cf3 Sharma (2003) \cf2 also performs unit root tests on the population of India's cities and finds evidence of non-stationarity of city growth. The latter paper does however not explicitly link its finding to Gibrat's Law, instead focusing more closely on the short-run dynamics of Indian city growth. \
Given the features of our data set, i.e. annual population data for the period 1925\'961999 (except for the 5 years during the WWII period, 1940\'961944), we argue that we can use standard unit root tests on individual city sizes.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 Given the decline of total urban population over the sample period we decided to allow the constant term in the growth rate, K\cf2 \dn3 it\cf2 \up0 , to be possibly trend-wise changing over time,\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 i.e. resulting in the following equation that will be estimated for each city separately: \
The first column in \cf3 Table 8 \cf2 shows the result of these city specific unit root tests. It shows the percentage of cities for which the null of a unit root is rejected at a 1%, 5% and 10% level. \
For completeness, it also gives the outcome of two different panel unit root tests. The first is the earlier mentioned \cf3 Levin et al. (2002) \cf2 test, which tests the null of all series having a unit root versus the alternative of all series being stationary with the same autoregressive parameter. The second is the later developed \cf3 Im et al. (2003) \cf2 test that tests the null of a unit root in all series versus the alternative of some of the series being stationary (with a potentially varying autoregressive parameter) and some of the series being non-stationary. Hereby the latter test is thus somewhat less restrictive under the alternative. \
Both the individual unit root tests and the Levin\'96Lin\'96Chu panel unit root test do not reject the null hypothesis of a unit root. Even at a 10% level the null is never rejected for any of the cities in the sample. The Im\'96Pesaran\'96Shin test on the other hand rejects the unit root null at the 5% level (it does not reject it at the 1% level), hereby providing some weaker evidence in favor of Gibrat's Law. Overall, this would suggest overwhelming evidence in favor of Gibrat's Law with all cities seemingly growing independent of their size. There is, however, one major caveat when drawing this conclusion from these standard unit root tests and that is (maybe not surprisingly) the WWII shock. As shown before, the large and sudden impact of WWII had a tremendous effect on the German urban landscape with large cities losing more population more systematically compared to the smaller cities in Germany. When performing a standard unit root test one implicitly assumes that the whole effect of this destruction during the war can be viewed as a one-time extreme realization from the distribution of the error term, i.e. \uc0\u949 \cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 in (10). This however seems somewhat unlikely, instead WWII can be argued to have had a more substantial impact changing the deterministic components of city size growth, i.e. the constant and/or trend in Eq. (10). If this would be the case, to ignore it when performing a standard unit root test results in an underrejection of the unit root null hypothesis (see \cf3 Perron, 1989; Perron, 1997\cf2 ). This would imply that Gibrat's Law is potentially overaccepted by standard unit root tests in the case of German city sizes. \
To allow for the possibility of a change in the deterministic components of city size growth, we follow \cf3 Perron (1997) \cf2 and estimate the following equation: \
where and T\cf2 \dn3 b \cf2 \up0 is the time at which the change occurs. The null hypothesis still remains that of a unit root, the alternative however changes from the series being stationary around a deterministic trend to the series being stationary around a deterministic trend that is allowed to change at time T\cf2 \dn3 b\cf2 \up0 . The exact timing of the break date is determined endogenously by the data (so that also T\cf2 \dn3 b \cf2 \up0 is actually city specific), see \cf3 Perron (1997) \cf2 for details and \cf3 Hansen (2001) \cf2 for a discussion. We choose this procedure over the option of exogenously setting the break date at WWII to allow for the possibility that other events that could have had a major impact on German city sizes during our sample period like, for example, the separation from and subsequent reunion of West and East Germany (see \cf3 Redding and Sturm, 2005, and Redding, Sturm and Wolf, 2007\cf2 ), which potentially may have left even a bigger mark on the evolution of some of the cities in our sample. \
The results of these unit root tests when we allow for a one-time break are shown in the third column of \cf3 Table 8\cf2 . The impact of allowing for a one-time break in the deterministic components of city growth is quite striking. Instead of accepting the null of a unit root for all cities in our sample as the standard unit root tests did, now the unit root null is rejected for 74.2% of the cities in favor of these series being trend stationary with a one-time shift in this trend. The date at which the break occurs is almost exclusively found at WWII, which shows that WWII's impact on city sizes is dominating that of other historical events affecting German cities during the second half of the 20th century.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 The high rejection rate of the unit root null hypothesis also implies that the relevance of Gibrat's Law, which seemed evident based on the standard unit root tests gets a substantial blow. Correcting for the impact of WWII on the evolution of individual city size, Gibrat's Law is found to hold only for about one quarter of the cities in our sample. \
Together with the evidence obtained using non-parametric methods in the previous section, this dynamic evidence on Gibrat's Law sheds substantial doubt on the relevance of random city size growth in case of Germany, especially for the post-WWII period.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 Instead the data seem to indicate that city growth does depend on initial city size, with smaller cities growing faster than larger ones.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 This faster growth of smaller cities does not comply with urban economic theories exhibiting random city growth. It suggests that other theories of urban growth are perhaps more relevant to explain the post-WWII experience of the German urban landscape. As the post-WWII and pre-WWII period are so different with respect to the implications regarding the relevance of urban economic theories, WWII seems to have had a crucial (initializing) role in the changing of both the type and evolution of the German urban system. \
Having found compelling evidence on the irrelevance of random city growth as an explanation of the evolution of the German urban system, the next section, building on earlier work by \cf3 Davis and Weinstein (2002) \cf2 and \cf3 Brakman et al. (2004)\cf2 , provides additional evidence based on the evolution of relative city sizes, i.e. the position of cities within the city size distribution, by which we try to distinguish between the two other competing theories of urban growth, namely increasing returns to scale and locational fundamentals. \
In previous work, \cf3 Brakman et al. (2004) \cf2 and \cf3 Bosker et al. (2007)\cf2 , we already looked at the immediate impact of WWII on German relative city size. Drawing on the methodology developed by \cf3 Davis and Weinstein (2002, 2004)\cf2 , these papers argue that the destruction during WWII was largely exogenous to the level of economic activity in cities and use the level of destruction during WWII as instruments for population growth during WWII when estimating the following equation: \
where s\cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 denotes city i's size relative to total German population, i.e. S\cf2 \dn3 i\cf2 \up0 /S\cf2 \dn3 tot\cf2 \up0 , X\cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 are other exogenous variables that can be included in the regression and \uc0\u949 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 is a random error term. Estimating this equation for Germany, \cf3 Brakman et al. (2004) \cf2 find evidence that the average German city had in 1963 returned to a relative city size of about 60% of its pre-WWII level. \cf3 Bosker et al. (2007) \cf2 extend this simple framework by estimating a threshold regression in the spirit of \cf3 Hansen (2000) \cf2 hereby allowing for the possibility of multiple equilibria and find evidence for the existence of two different equilibria, with the least destructed cities shifting to an equilibrium characterized by a larger relative city size. \
The proposed framework, i.e. estimating Eq. (12),\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 can however be argued to be subject to some caveats. First, the estimation results are sensitive to the choice of period over which post-WWII growth is calculated. Second, the estimation results are only able to describe the impact of WWII on the average German city, they are unable to say something about the individual experience of a particular city (the experience of the average city can even be argued to be of secondary importance when the fit of the regression is far from perfect). Third, and most important, the estimation of Eq. (12) is merely a static cross-section regression. Concluding that relative city sizes are mean reverting or random over time is impossible on the basis of such a simple cross-section. Instead, as argued by \cf3 Hohenberg (2004) \cf2 the historical evolution of the urban structure must always be studied in terms of fully dynamic models. This is exactly what we purport to do here. Exploiting the long time dimension of our data set, we are able to look at the evolution of each individual city's relative size employing fully dynamic econometric estimation techniques. \
\cf3 Davis and Weinstein (2002) \cf2 already mentioned the fact that the proper test for the persistence of shocks would be performing unit root tests on relative city shares. They refrain from doing this and instead resort to the static framework in Eq. (12) on the basis of the earlier mentioned low power of these unit root tests in small samples. Considering the extent of our data set, we think we are in a much better position to apply such unit root tests and can hereby provide much more dynamic evidence on the \'91mean reversion\'92 of relative city sizes. More specifically we estimate the following equation for each of the cities in our sample: \
where s\cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 is the share of a particular city i in total German population, the lagged values of city growth included in the regression control for potential autocorrelation and \uc0\u957 \cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 is a random error component. If \uc0\u950 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 is found to be significantly smaller than 0, city share is stationary around \uc0\u958 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 and any shock will not have a lasting effect. If on the other hand \uc0\u950 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 is found to be equal to 0 then all shocks are permanent and city i's share in total German population follows a random walk.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 We estimate Eq. (13) applying Augmented Dickey Fuller tests to all of the cities in our sample. \cf3 Table 9 \cf2 shows the results; it also includes the results of the earlier mentioned Levin\'96Lin\'96Chu and Im\'96Pesaran\'96Shin panel unit root tests. The results of both the individual city share unit root tests and the panel unit root tests are at odds with the notion of city shares being stationary over time. The null hypothesis of a unit root in city share is not rejected for almost all cities in the sample. \
This would constitute considerable evidence against the locational fundamentals theory. However, as was the case in our earlier unit root tests on city sizes (see \cf3 Table 8\cf2 ), this conclusion does not take the possible different effect of the WWII shock into account. Also in case of city shares, the major impact of WWII could have resulted in a shift in the deterministic component of a city's relative size, i.e. a deterministic shift in the mean \uc0\u958 \cf2 \dn3 i\cf2 \up0 . Such a change in the deterministic component could for example be due to a change in locational fundamentals as a result of the destruction in WWII. \
To allow for this possibility we apply the following unit root test suggested by \cf3 Perron and Vogelsang (1992) \cf2 that allows for a one-time break in the mean of the series \uc0\u958 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 (endogenously determined by the data) and is based on the estimate of \uc0\u958 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 in the following regression: \
where u\cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 is the random error term and s\cf2 \dn3 i\cf2 \up0 \uc0\u772 \cf2 \dn3 t \cf2 \up0 are the residuals of a regression that projects s\cf2 \dn3 it \cf2 \up0 on the deterministic component , i.e.a mean that is allowed to shift at time T\cf2 \dn3 b\cf2 \up0 . More formally:\
where DU\cf2 \dn3 t \cf2 \up0 = 1 if t N T\cf2 \dn3 b \cf2 \up0 and 0 otherwise. Estimating \uc0\u950 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 in this way controls for the possible one-time shift in the deterministic mean in the \'91first stage\'92 of the procedure (15) and estimates the autoregressive parameter, \uc0\u950 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 in the \'91second stage\'92 (14). \cf3 Perron (1990) \cf2 called this the additive outlier (AO) model, which is appropriate to model a sudden one-time change, which is clearly the case when considering the destruction caused by the heavy bombardments during WWII. \cf3 Perron and Vogelsang (1992) \cf2 discuss the appropriate test statistics when testing for \uc0\u950 \cf2 \dn3 i \cf2 \up0 = 1. \
The results of applying the AO-model to test for a unit root in German city shares under the null versus stationary city shares around a possibly shifting mean under the alternative are also shown in \cf3 Table 9\cf2 . As was the case for the unit root tests on city sizes, the effect of taking account of the possible special nature of the WWII shock (i.e. having an impact on the deterministic components of city shares) is quite substantial. At a 5% confidence level the unit root null hypothesis is rejected in favor of a stationary city share with a one-time break for 27% of the cities in our sample. Even more striking is the fact that for all the cities that are stationary, the timing of the break is (endogenously) found to be WWII. As in the unit root tests on city sizes, allowing for a one-time break in the deterministic component(s) the impact of WWII overshadows the effects of the other historic events (most noteworthy the separation from and unification with East-Germany) that could have had their impact on the evolution of individual cities and the city size distribution as a whole. \
The evidence provided in \cf3 Table 9 \cf2 constitutes evidence against theories that fall under the locational fundamentals category. The \'91standard\'92 unit root tests reject stationarity of city shares for all cities in our sample except one (Hamm). When explicitly taking account of a possible shift in locational fundamentals during WWII, by allowing for a change in the deterministic mean around which a particular city is stationary, stationarity of city sizes is accepted for a much larger proportion of the cities in our sample. This does however not save the locational fundamentals theories as being relevant in the case of Germany. Still random shocks have a persistent effect on the relative city share of more than 70% of the cities in our sample. Furthermore, although random shocks are not persistent in the case of the cities that are found to be stationary, the extreme shock of WWII did have a lasting effect on the city share of those cities by changing the deterministic mean around which the city share is stationary.\cf3 \up10  \cf2 \up0 As the unit root tests only find the break in the deterministic mean but do not help us to understand why this break occurs (other than the date at which the break occurs), in Appendix B we tentatively look into some characteristics that distinguish the 17 \'93break stationary\'94 cities (27% of our sample at the 5% level, see \cf3 Table 9\cf2 ) from the other cities in the sample. \
Overall, we think that this dynamic evidence on the effect of the large shock experienced during WWII constitutes considerable evidence against the relevance of locational fundamentals theories in explaining the evolution of the German urban landscape. The \cf2 \cb5 relevance of the other theories (random growth and increasing returns to scale) is somewhat harder to assess using the results of the unit root tests in this section. \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb5 Most of the empirical literature on city size distributions has focused on the USA. Other countries might experience a different evolution of their city size distribution, as this paper shows to be the case for West-Germany. Using a unique annual data set for 62 West-German cities that covers most of the 20th century, we look at the evolution of both the city size distribution as a whole and each individual city separately. The West-German case is of particular interest as its urban system has been the subject to some of history's largest (exogenous) urban shocks, most notably WWII and the German division and subsequent reunification. Our data set allows for the identification of these shocks and provides evidence on the effects of these \'91quasi-natural experiments\'92 on the city size distribution as a whole as well as on each individual city separately that we subsequently use to distinguish between three competing theories that explain urban growth. Our first main finding is that (the evolution of) the German city size distribution is permanently affected by the World War II shock, more so than by any other shocks. Cities that have been hit relatively hard due to the substantial bombings and the subsequent allied invasion do not recover the loss in relative size. After the war, the city size distribution does not revert to its pre-WWII level, but shifts to one characterized by a more even distribution of population over the cities in the sample. Compared to the impact of WWII, the separation from and later reunion with East-Germany has had much less impact on relative city sizes. Our second main contribution is that we show that, once corrected for the heavy destruction during WWII, (panel) unit root tests that are used to test for the validity of proportional city growth reject Gibrat's Law of proportional effect for about 75% of all cities. This constitutes considerable evidence against urban economic theories exhibiting random growth, a finding that is further confirmed by additional non-parametric evidence. Finally, evidence from (panel) unit root tests on relative city size also shed substantial doubt on the relevance of locational fundamental theories in explaining the development of the German urban system, even when allowing these fundamentals to change during WWII. \cf2 \cb1 \
\cf2 \cb5 Overall our results are most consistent with theories emphasizing increasing returns to scale in city growth. However, we have not provided a proper test for this type of theory, concluding only in favor of it given the empirical evidence against the other two theories. Developing a proper test of urban growth theories exhibiting increasing returns is in our view a fruitful area of future research that could further substantiate our claim. }