{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue109;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c50196;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{none\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13020\viewh10560\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A major challenge for urban research is the construction of databases that are able to reflect the long-term evolution of systems of cities, especially in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In the old industrial countries, this period is characterized by dramatic urban growth, related to economic innovation cycles that gave a specific impulse to some cities, such as during the first industrial revolution (coal, iron), the second industrial revolution (electricity, petrol), and the new technologies of information and communication. One particular interest is the way economic and technical innovations are diffusing into urban hierarchy and may impact the relative growth of cities according to their size classes. However, the methods used for delineating urban areas largely affect the resulting measures of urban growth (Berry and Okulicz-Kozaryn \cf3 2012\cf2 ), so that they have to be linked to some common approach to the very definition of the city over time. In this paper, we specifically focus on the United States\'92 urban areas since the first census (1790). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Dealing with spatio-temporal databases has been considered as a challenge in the domain of geographical information science for a few decades (Peuquet \cf3 1994\cf2 , Claramunt and Th\'e9riault \cf3 1995\cf2 , Yuan \cf3 2001\cf2 , O\'92Sullivan \cf3 2005\cf2 ). All authors point out the fact that entities have to be thought of as evolving objects. In our case, such an approach would ensure that the longitudinal comparability of urban populations over two centuries is based on an agreement on what is \'91urban\'92 versus \'91rural\'92 along this period (a prerequisite for the spatial delineation of the urban objects). The method proposed is based on the consideration of an anthropological invariant, the 24-hour day that limits in every region of the world the time-budget dedicated to the commute from the home to the workplace. In this approach, we interpret the urban area as a socio-spatial object formed by way of interactions between one or several centers (defined by a minimal threshold in populations or density) and outlying settlements within the span of one day (Pumain \cf3 2000\cf2 ). The spatial extent of these interactions has dramatically increased since the nineteenth century but remains very stable if considered with a time referential. Indeed, the observation of travel times between home and workplace shows that they are extremely stable, the average duration being one hour per return journey (Zahavi \cf3 1974\cf2 , Pooley et al. \cf3 2005\cf2 , Cervero \cf3 2011\cf2 ). As early as the start of the twentieth century, various geographers and urban planners, like Patrick Geddes (\cf3 1915\cf2 ), suggested that the one-hour isochron should be used to outline the conurbations formed by the suburban railroads (around 10 miles for New York, London, or Paris, Bretagnolle \cf3 2009\cf2 ). In the 1920s, the use of automobiles for home-to-work journeys in the United States engendered more spread-out, discontinuous urban forms, and Roderick MacKenzie (\cf3 1933\cf2 ) suggested that \'91the urban-rural dichotomy is becoming of decreasing significance\'92. He elaborated the concept of \'91metropolitan communities\'92 that could be delineated with the \'91commuting time\'92 of one hour or one and a half hours. In the 1960s, Brian Berry suggested that the metropolitan areas fit with the 20 miles commuting range and that they could be delineated using the sole criteria of the daily journey to work (\cf3 1960\cf2 , \cf3 1973\cf2 ). In more recent periods, some surveys conducted in US metropolitan areas show that the mean time-budget for travel to work is still around one hour for the 90% of the working population that use their cars for travel (Haas et al. \cf3 2006\cf2 ). Similar observations are made for other countries in the world (Crozet and Joly \cf3 2004\cf2 , Metz \cf3 2008\cf2 ). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 These considerations underlined the construction of a first database in 2008, produced \'91manually\'92, meaning city per city and using Geographical Information System with different layers and historical sources for delineating the time-scale envelopes of urban areas. The observation of real clusters formed by suburbs and city centers led us to extend the Zahavi time-budget: in order to integrate the most remote suburbs, we considered the one-hour instead of the half-an-hour envelope.
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up13  
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 This approach allowed assessment of the methodology (Bretagnolle et al. \cf3 2008\cf2 ) but has been dramatically improved in the last two years by automating the process. A new database with much more urban areas (a total of 1350) has then been built and is presented here. In the first part of this paper, we discuss theoretical choices made to elaborate the database, then we present the method used for automatically constructing urban areas and finally the resulting measures of urban population and growth, which differ markedly from those in the literature. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 There is a marked coincidence between the extent of an urban area, urban transport technologies, and the one-hour time-budget. The maps showing the evolution of Chicago, drawn up using a time scale, illustrate this relation (\cf3 Figure 1\cf2 ). In the first half of the nineteenth century, horse-drawn vehicles could enable a speed of 8\'969 km/h but were so expensive that the radius of the city remained the walking-city one. With the installation of cable car technology in 1882 and electric trams in the mid-1890s, the radius of the urban area was about 10\'9612 km. This distance doubled with the motor car by the middle of the twentieth century. In 2010, the spatial extent of commuting covered a radius of 50 km. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The Chicago example is not isolated, and observations by researchers underlined the global stability of the one-hour travel time-budget between home and workplace (Zahavi \cf3 1974\cf2 ) even if they tend to be slightly more important for larger cities and for recent periods than for the little ones (Crozet and Joly \cf3 2004\cf2 ) and for the past periods (Pooley et al. \cf3 2005\cf2 ). As quoted by Cervero (\cf3 2011\cf2 ), \'91despite dramatic gains in the average speed of travel conferred by modern technology over the past century \'96 faster cars, super-highways, limited-access/grade-separated freeways \'96 the amount of time urbanites spend traveling has remained largely unchanged over many decades, if not centuries\'92. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In our long-term database, we used a time\'96space reference framework to delineate the boundaries of urban areas by aggregating central and neighboring places located less than one hour from the center(s). The first aggregations appear at the time of the 1870 census, with the new suburban railroads. From 1940, we used the metropolitan areas determined by the Census Bureau on the basis of the daily journeys to work. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 From a database point of view, urban areas are composite objects and one needs to identify both the building blocks and the relations that allow them to be considered as component parts of the cities. When moving to the integration of time in these constructions, researchers have to make a choice between different possibilities (\cf3 Figure 2\cf2 ). The first one (case A in \cf3 Figure 2\cf2 ) consists of constructing temporal series by simply collecting successive delineations of cities, even if these delineations are based on different criteria or parameters. The resulting spatio-temporal objects are just a compilation of the static objects, linked by their ID, each of them having being conceived at one instant and not in a dynamic way. This approach is generally followed by researchers who adopt the delineations produced by national census boards (for instance, Dobkins and Ioannides \cf3 2000\cf2 , who used the official delineations of metropolitan areas between 1950 and 2000 except for the year 1990, for which they chose the 1980 delineations). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The three other models of time integration are based on an approach involving constraints on delineation (case B), on operational definition (case C), and on functional definition (case D). Case B is the most commonly adopted by researchers. The object is considered through the same delineation of one reference year, generally the most recent date. Inside this constant delineation, at each date, only the \'91urban\'92 building blocks are taken into account, that is, the blocks exceeding a minimum population or density threshold. For instance, Black and Henderson (\cf3 2003\cf2 ) chose to retain the delineations of metropolitan areas in 1990 and to consider only the urban population of the counties inside these fixed boundaries at each date since 1950. This method presents the risk of overestimating total population of largest cities in the most distant decades. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Case C consists of supervising time integration by using a constant operational definition that provides for an evolving delineation through time. For instance, a constant minimum density threshold used to delineate continuous built-up areas, when applied at different census periods, enables the urban sprawl of a city to be followed by aggregating the surrounding villages that exceed the threshold at each date. This approach has been used by the US Census Bureau for delineating urbanized areas since 1950 (see note 12 infra). It is very reliable in the short or medium term, from two decades to half a century, but more debatable when the urban database aims to cover a longer time period of one or two centuries, characterized by considerable changes in transportation technology. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Case D consists of supervising the functional definition of the urban objects over time, defining cities as socio-spatial objects formed by the ways of interactions between centers and outlying settlements within the span of one day. Their spatial extent, as previously suggested, may be modeled by the one-hour time budget. This is the method used in our database: we defined large urban areas as municipalities until the second half of the nineteenth century, then as functional urban areas delineated by the one hour isochron until the second half of the twentieth century, and finally as metropolitan or micropolitan
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10  
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 areas. Thus, the database comprises several types of urban entity that can evolve from one state to another in the course of their existence. For example, the urban area of Boston is represented between 1790 and 1860 by the municipality of Boston, then up to 1940 by the aggregation of several municipalities (one center and different suburbs), and finally from 1940 by the metropolitan area. Other urban areas of smaller size move from the status of municipality to that of micropolitan area. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 A conceptual data model has been built to formalize the different links between the statistical sources mobilized and the urban objects constructed at each period. The complexity of such a model lies not only on the diversity of sources but also on the fact that the relations between elements evolve over time, according to the evolution of the urban areas definitions. This is particularly problematic in the United States, where the metropolitan areas are delineated on the basis of the county grid. Because of the size of the counties, certain metropolitan areas are extremely large, particularly in the west, and the passage from functional urban areas delineated by the one hour isochron to metropolitan areas generally gives rise to a considerable jump in population. In order to minimize this bias, the 1940 date was used for comparing urban populations defined according to one or the other criterion. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The small urban areas are particularly interesting in the United States, in order to know whether they have experienced relative decline since the nineteenth century as in Europe. In France, for instance, the urban concentration rose dramatically in the second half of the nineteenth century and after, reflecting the relative growth of large cities as a result of rural exodus and the emergence of large manufacturing enterprises enabling scale economies. This also seems to be the case in the United States, according to historians (Chudacoff \cf3 1981\cf2 ), even if international immigration is more important than rural exodus. Nevertheless, this point is controversial as some urban researchers call into question the intensity of the urban concentration in the United States (Berry \cf3 1976\cf2 , Dobkins and Ioannides \cf3 2000\cf2 , Black and Henderson \cf3 2003\cf2 ). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 It was not possible to answer this question with the first version of the database, built in 2008, which considered only medium and large cities.
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10  
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 In the database we present here, a first improvement consisted of dramatically reducing the threshold to 4000 inhabitants in 1870. For the all census periods, the total number of urban places doubled, increasing from 1186 to 2505 entities. These places are the building blocks that form the functional urban areas delineated by the one hour isochron, either as central municipalities or as \'91suburbs\'92. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Selecting the urban places that would be integrated into the database raised major difficulties as these objects relate to political categories.
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10  
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 It was not possible to use merely the status of \'91city\'92 or \'91town\'92 to consider a place as urban, for instance in New England states where some villages have the political status of a town and where complex spatial patterns can be found (for instance, one city included inside a town). Consequently, for all the states except the New England ones, we integrated in our database any place mentioned as \'91urban\'92 in the census and larger than our population threshold, whereas in New England states, we integrated all the cities but only some of the towns.
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10 6 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 Another difficulty concerned spatial and administrative changes in the dynamic trajectories of these urban places. Around 250 changes were noted, consisting of annexations/consolidations/ fusions, divisions/secessions, inclusions and spatial overlaps. We also recorded changes in the names of these entities and in their status (city, town, borough, etc.). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf3 Figure 3 \cf2 highlights the spatial dynamics of these urban places along pioneer frontiers (Wade \cf3 1959\cf2 ). A first frontier reached the Ohio river around 1810, after which the obstacle of the Appalachian mountains was reduced by the construction of canals (1810\'961830) and railroads (1830 and after). These transportation networks connected the eastern places not only to the booming Ohio of the first industrial revolution, but also to the wheat producers who used the Mississippi river to export their harvest. The second frontier was opened by the Spanish moving in from Mexico, but it was not until the gold rush of the middle of the nineteenth century that two Western places exceeded our minimum threshold of 3000 inhabitants (San Francisco and Sacramento). Some other urban places appeared in Territories,
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10 8 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 on the southern coast (New Orleans) or in the Rocky Mountains (Santa Fe, Salt Lake City or Denver). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The implementation of the conceptual design gave rise to the development of an automated process lying on an analogy with the spatial analysis model built by Reilly (\cf3 1931\cf2 ). This model, originally built for modeling the limits and evolution of retail influence fields, is used here for modeling the limits and evolution of employment influence fields, in relation to improvements in transport technologies and urban sprawl. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In the first step of the modeling process, the input data consist of a series of urban places with their population and their name, at different dates. The aim is to generate a process able to reproduce the same result as for urban growth that consists of the absorption of neighboring places by the central places(s) during urban concentration phases (here the second half of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth century). This process relies on the concept of \'91influence field\'92: each place is viewed as a potential center for a larger urban area and its influence field is calculated by the model. The different influence fields are confronted in order to hierarchize the places and shape their spatial interlinking. As in the Reilly model, the \'91influence area\'92 stems from an estimation of the attractiveness of a place i on a place j. In such a model, a place j is absorbed by a place i if the intensity of the attraction of i over j is the largest one, among all attractions exerted on j. The attractiveness of a place should be measured by the amount of employment, but these figures are not available at this level for the whole period. We have then used the population figures, which can be considered as a good proxy. The intensity of the attractiveness of an urban place i over another place j is modeled as proportional to the population of i and inversely proportional to the distance between i and j. This can be written as 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 where I
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf2 \dn6 ij 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 is the attractiveness of i for j, k an adjustment factor, and f() the shape of the decrease of attractiveness according to distance. These two last elements have to be calibrated. At each date, the result is a directed acyclic graph, where each urban place is linked to the one that exerts the maximum attraction on it. The relevance of such a model for constructing the composite objects lies on its capacity to cluster the building blocks in urban places and to identify a hierarchical structure within the cluster, close to the historical structure. This would not be directly obtained when using some structural process such as buffers. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The model has been calibrated for the period from 1870 to 2010. However, from 1940 there are fewer and fewer accessibility-based urban areas because they are absorbed by the metropolitan or micropolitan areas. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The function that is used for estimating the decrease of attractiveness according to distance can be a negative power function or an exponential function. The exponential model is well suited to the data and processes considered here. Indeed, the influence of an employment pole is very strong near the center, and then decreases rapidly. With a power function model, the influence near the center would be relatively smaller and it would decrease more slowly and would thus remain influential for points at a considerable distance from the center. Equation (2) for the decline function is as follows: 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 where \uc0\u945  and \u946  are positive parameters that describe the inhibiting effect of distance (\u946  is generally called \'91the distance friction\'92). They have been calibrated
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10  
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 using average effective distance travelled in one hour at each of the considered dates (\cf3 Figure 4\cf2 ). As there are no official maps or data concerning the delineations of functional urban areas in the past, we achieved a considerable amount of work in 2008 on different sources \'96 types of transport network, historical sites of cities, etc.
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 The resulting influence fields modeled by Equation (1) give a set of connected components that draw the composition of each accessibility-based urban area, for each date. Each subgraph is a tree and the urban area takes the name of the urban place at the root of the tree. Otherwise, the structure of the tree can be interpreted in terms of agglomeration processes as the shapes of subgraphs reflect some hierarchy of the urban places and the way the places have been connected step by step. For instance, in the case of polycentric areas, two or more centers are identified by the model in a first step and then aggregated into the same area due to their proximity. The largest becomes the new center of the accessibility-based urban area, like Minneapolis (465,000 inh. in 1930), that aggregates not only Columbia Heights (6000 inh.) but also Saint-Paul (271,000 inh., located at 12 km) and South Saint-Paul (10,000 inh.). \cf3 Figure 5 \cf2 illustrates another case of connected components in the region of Paterson, Newark and Jersey City, where each of these principal urban poles is connected with the others, some by direct links (chain length one) and others by indirect links (chain length greater than one). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 It can be noted that a condition was added, aiming at ensuring a degree of consistency over time for the database. Indeed, the outputs of the model are readapted according to a temporal continuity constraint, including each connection graph inside the boundaries of the metropolitan areas that absorb them from 1940 or after. In other words, if a suburb is connected by the model but belongs to a neighboring Standard Metropolitan Area (SMA) in the next decades, it is removed from the initial graph and connected to the neighboring one. For instance, in \cf3 Figure 5\cf2 , the two places located at the northeast of Newark and very closed to that city (Harrison and Kearny) were finally aggregated by the model to Jersey city as they have belonged to the SMA of this latter city since 1940. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The connection graphs obtained for the very large cities (over 500,000 inhabitants in 1930) gave rise to a particular assessment. Indeed, these cities are very specific in terms of accessibility patterns and the basic process is not accurate for them. As they are particularly dynamic and embedded in international networks, they paid special attention to (and made investments in) highly connected transport networks, much more efficient and spatially extended than the ones found in smaller cities. They are also characterized by annexation of peripheral territories by certain central municipalities, such that a model was not readily applicable. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The 13 large urban areas of over 500,000 inhabitants in 1930 were therefore enriched by more precise historical documentation.
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10 11 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 The model was used to construct links, then we checked each of them using this documentation. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 In order to validate the 13 largest urban areas but also the others resulting from the automatic aggregations of the potential model, we compared the results obtained for 1940 and the urbanized areas created in 1950 by the Census Bureau
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up10 12 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 (\cf3 Figure 6\cf2 ). The time lag between both dates (basically due to source constraints, as urbanized areas are not available in 1940) makes sense when interpreted through urbanization processes. Functional urban areas reflect leapfrog patterns, and the gaps between train stations or highway entrances are progressively filled and transformed into continuous built-up spaces. \cf3 Figure 6 \cf2 shows a clear match between the 1940 connection graphs of the functional areas and the 1950 surfaces of the continuous built-up areas. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf3 Table 1 \cf2 gives the total number of urban areas formed in the database starting from 1870. It can thus be seen that from 1900 the number of aggregations increases considerably. In 1920, nearly 26% of all the urban places form \'91suburbs\'92 (according to our definition), and this percentage reaches 34% in 1940. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 A second result concerns the largest urban areas. A comparison of their populations and those of the central urban places is presented in \cf3 Table 2\cf2 . Boston holds the record, with 43 aggregated urban places within a radius of 25 km. The populations of the urban areas of Boston or Newark are 2.5 times those of their central municipalities, and San Francisco and Los Angeles grow by 190% and 150%, respectively, once converted into functional urban areas. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 As presented in \cf3 Table 3\cf2 , the 1830\'962000 period can be interpreted as an exponential phase of urban growth (with the exception of the 1929 crisis and the Great Depression), and 2000\'962010 as stabilization after this transition. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The spatial distribution of growth (\cf3 Figure 7\cf2 ) illustrates two other characteristics of the American urban system. As in other regions of the world, a striking stability is observed in the distribution of urban area size, particularly towards the top of the hierarchy (New York, Philadelphia, Boston, etc.). A marked specificity is however the very narrow correlation between the different innovation cycles, the associated resources, and the emergence of new regional metropolises: 
\fs24 \cf2 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 		
\f1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\dn3 \uc0\u9679 
\f0  \'a0\up0 In the area of the Great Lakes, with the first industrial revolution (Pittsburgh, Detroit, Cleveland, Buffalo, Chicago). 
\fs24 \uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 		
\f1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\dn3 \uc0\u9679 
\f0  \'a0\up0 In California and Texas with oil and the second industrial revolution (Dallas, San Antonio, Los Angeles, Oakland, even if some cities of the first industrial revolution remain very dynamic with the automobile industry, such as Detroit or Akron). 
\fs24 \uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 		
\f1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\dn3 \uc0\u9679 
\f0  \'a0\up0 In Florida, California, Arizona, and New Mexico with the new information technologies, but also retirees and tourism economy, in the years 1940 to 1980 (Miami, Tampa, Phoenix, San Diego, San Jose, etc.). 
\fs24 \uc0\u8232 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 To take into account the sometimes considerable size of the counties and subcounties, aggregated between two censuses into metropolitan areas, we calculated not only classical growth rates according to an evolving delineation but also according to a constant delineation for two consecutive census dates. For instance, the rate calculated between 1950 and 1960 gives the growth of the population within the same spatial boundaries, that is, the area in 1960. The results sound very different. The classical growth rates range from 2 to 2.5%, whereas the growth rates computed with a constant delineation gradually slow, from around 2% in the first half of the twentieth century to about 1% in the second half, like in Europe. In comparison, the rates calculated from the official metropolitan area delineations for the period 1950\'962010 range from 2 to 3%. 
\fs24 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Urban researchers classically use rank-size graphs in order to measure urban hierarchization. Indeed, the regularity of the distribution of city size throughout the study period makes it possible to adjust the relationship between rank and urban population by way of a mathematical function. The slope of the adjustment, in absolute value, is an indicator of the degree of inequality of size among urban areas. When this degree increases over time, it means that the larger cities have a higher growth than the average one, leading to an urban concentration (or hierarchization). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 A large corpus of literature has been published and points to the specificity of the United States, thought to be characterized by a nonhierarchical process of urbanization (Berry \cf3 1976\cf2 ) or a slightly increasing concentration (Dobkins and Ioannides \cf3 2000\cf2 , Black and Henderson \cf3 2003\cf2 ) in contrast to what is observed in Europe. It is suggested that this could be explained by a sort of wariness towards large cities and an inclination towards scattered, less dense settlements close to nature.
\fs18\fsmilli9333 \cf3 \up13 13 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \up0 The results of urban concentration measures using our harmonized database do not however confirm this particularity. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 A first experiment aimed to compare the inequality index measured with classic delineations used by researchers who approach urban areas as mere urban municipalities, for instance Zipf (\cf3 1949\cf2 ), Madden (\cf3 1955\cf2 ), or Batty (\cf3 2006\cf2 ). They do not take into account the suburbs of large cities, and they thereby underestimate their growth. The results are visible in \cf3 Figure 8\cf2 : the degree of inequality increases from 1890 to 1930, then decreases (probably as a result of the 1929 crisis and the Great Depression), whereas using the urban municipalities, it increases very slightly. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Two other databases start from the definition of the metropolitan areas and cover the period 1900\'961990 (Dobkins and Ioannides \cf3 2000\cf2 , Black and Henderson \cf3 2003\cf2 ). These two different databases overestimate the perimeter of cities in the first half of the twentieth century (\cf3 Figure 9\cf2 ). While Black and Henderson (\cf3 2003\cf2 ) conclude with a small but significant movement towards increasing inequality, the present research obtains a very marked hierarchical organization up to 1970. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The particular feature of the United States is, however, the existence of two periods of de-concentration, the first from 1970 to 1980 and the second from 1990 to 2000. The first period of relative decline in large cities has been described by Brian Berry (\cf3 1976\cf2 ). The largest cities, particularly in the northeast (New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Jersey City, Newark, Springfield, etc.) and in the industrial heartland (Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Milwaukee, Buffalo, etc.), show a marked decrease in population between these two dates, while in the sun-belt, smaller towns and cities in the south (Florida, New Mexico, Arizona) and the west (California) show marked growth (4\'965% per year). The second dconcentration phase (1990\'962000) is more difficult to interpret: it does not appear to result from a decline in the large cities, which are generally in a growth phase and register the highest growth rates according to size category. 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Starting from a definition of the urban area within a spatio-temporal frame of reference, we proposed an automatic method for constructing comparable delineations integrating the development of suburbs between 1870 and 1940. Only the 13 largest cities from a total of 1350 were processed manually using historical sources. We then integrated the metropolitan and micropolitan areas from the 1940s onwards. This work presents the interest of using a coherent envelope over time, based on the one-hour time-budget, but the results remain dependent on the changes in the statistical sources. For instance, problems raised by abrupt definition changes in 1940 have been described. However, these methods could be tested for other regions of the world, particularly those based on the model of Reilly (\cf3 1931\cf2 ). 
\fs24 \cf2 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 The thematic exploration of the database showed the impact of the delineation of cities on the measurement of urban growth and concentration. It is true that these measures are also very sensitive to other criteria, for instance, the minimum population threshold or changes in the definition of urban areas, which invites caution in interpreting the results. However, this database has made it possible to highlight the particularly sudden and marked growth of urban areas in the United States, first by a genuine conquest of space and territory and then, once these urban areas become major nodes within their territories, by their influence over their immediate environment. Thus in the timeframe of 150 years, the United States moved from a largely rural status and lifestyle (urbanization rates of around 15% in 1850) to a status of leader for various urban parameters (urbanization rate of 93%, maximum urban population of 19 million). These results encourage a close interdisciplinary dialog between urban geography and geographical information science. 
\fs24 \cf2 \
}