{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A relatively simple concept in urban economics, the size distribution of cities, has received considerable attention in the empirical literature - sufficient for it to have gained a place in urban economics textbooks (i.e., Mills and Hamilton, [17, pp. 58-621). Increasingly complex methodological techniques have been employed in the pursuit of an intriguing statistical regularity known as the \'93rank-size\'94 rule. The original models have now been applied to data from new countries, and updated more-general models have also been tested. But if one criticism can be leveled at this work, it is the following: the traditional empirical approach to this problem has limited the generality of the modeling process. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Determination and refinement of the exact value of the shape parameter of a Pareto distribution of city sizesis a worthwhile endeavor. However, not much structural modeling has been undertaken. For instance, while we know what city sizes are (or have been) in different countries at different times, it is useful to highlight particular factors which systematically affect city sizes. With this knowledge, we can make useful predictions about anticipated trends in city sizes, based on expectations about the explanatory variables. Although a two-stage regression estimation process has been employed, it is too restrictive in its first stage and yields inaccurate standard errors in the second stage. This paper investigates one-stage regression models which accommodate a typical deficiency in the city size data (truncation), include city-level variables, and utilize conditional distributions for the dependent variable which have the potential to take on a Pareto-like shape. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 In Section 2, we review and criticize current strategies for structural modeling of the distribution of city sizes.In Section 3, we propose altemative specifications for structural models which can be estimated by nonlinear methods. Section 4 outlines the dataset for a brief example. Results from our different specifications appear in Section 5, and Section 6 summarizes. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Beginning with the seminal work by Zipf [22] which uncovered the so-called \'93 rank-size\'94 rule, several investigators have explored the theoretical and empirical validity of the Pareto distribution (of which the \'93rank-size rule is a special case)asa description of city sizes.(SeeBeckmann [4], Berry [6], Richardson [18], and Alperovich (among others.) Empirical efforts have focused on the Pareto absolute frequency (as opposed to relative frequencies) and have utilized the absolute \'93survival function\'94 to fit univariate models. This statistical construct gives the absolute number of cities greater than or equal to size t, G(t). Algebraically, the hypothesized relationship is 
\f1\fs24 \
If 
\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 alpha= 1, then tG(t) = A, a constant equal to the population of the largest city (since G(t) = 1 for the largest city and 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 is its size). Many investigators have treated the rank-size hypothesis as simply H,: 1y= 1. Recently, Alperovich [3] has suggestedthat the appropriate rank-size rule hypothesis is the joint hypothesis H,: (a = 1 and A = size of largest city). All of these studies, however, are primarily descriptive. Their objective is the careful estimation of the magnitudes (and hypothesis tests regarding the true values) of the two parameters of the univariate size distribution. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 To our knowledge, the few attempts thus far to formulate structural models began with Rosen and Resnick [19], followed by Henderson [12] and Mills and Becker [16]. These studies fit separate Pareto size distributions for separate countries (or time periods and regions) in the first stageof their estimation. In an independent second stage, they attempt to explain cross-country variations in the estimated parameters, A, and alpha, by regressing each parameter on a vector of characteristics for each country, period, and / or region. For example, Rosen and Resnick experiment with population, GNP, and total miles of railway as determinants of the Pareto parameters for different countries. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Without diminishing the importance of the Rosen and Resnick transition to structural modeling, we must be cautious about interpreting their results because the OLS standard error estimates generated at the second stage of their procedure are incorrect. The values used for the dependent variable in the second stage (cw) are merely point estimates,each of which has non-zero variance. For accurate standard errors, one ought to use the true value of alpha, but it cannot be observed. Using the point estimates of the as ignores some of the variability in the true dependent variable, so the OLS regression standard error understates the true CTT. his quantity is used in the computation of standard errors for the individual slope coefficients in the second stage, so the end result is that the t test statistics for these coefficients are too large, possibly leading us to infer statistical significance when there is none. To remedy this problem, it is preferable to estimate all parameters in one step. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 The Rosen and Resnick approach has one other shortcoming. Since all cities in a particular country are lumped together during the computation of the shape parameter for the marginal distribution of city sizes for that country, it is not possible to include the characteristics of individual cities as explanatory variables anywhere in the model. This is unfortunate, since factors such as geography, accessibility, and age of a city might be expected to influence the sizeit attains. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 One factor which hinders generalization of city size distributions to a one-stage structural regression model is the persistent adherence to the Pareto distribution. Theoretical developments borrowed from the industrial organization literature on the size distribution of firms suggest the Pareto distribution, and this similarity undoubtedly contributed to the selection of the Pareto distribution by researchersexamining city sizes.To date, there has been little experimentation with alternative distributions. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 It is interesting to note, however, that the Pareto distribution was also once favored to describe the size distribution of incomes. But the recent econometrics literature, specifically McDonald [15], has considered an extremely general class of four-parameter density functions: generalized beta distributions of the first and second kind. He also cites recent work with a three-parameter special case of both of these distributions, the generalized gamma distribution. In particular, Esteban [9] is reported to have shown that the generalized gamma distribution has similar \'93tail behavior\'94 or includes as special or limiting cases,the lognormal, Weibull, simple gamma, exponential, normal, and Pareto distributions. Perhaps urban economists can again borrow successfully from other subdisciplines of economics by adopting some of these alternative distributions for city sizes. 
\f1\fs24 \
Why 
\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 should we abandon the Pareto distribution if we want to generalize city size distributions to a regression model? While this distribution has frequently performed well in describing the shape of uniuariate city size distributions, it has some decidedly inconvenient features. First, it is defined only over the domain (1,~). Furthermore, the mean of this distribution goes to infinity as its shape parameter falls to 1 or below.\'92 Judge et al. [14,825-8261 highlight yet another difficulty: the variance of a 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Pareto-distributed random variable does not exist for values of the shape parameter less than 2. These idiosyncracies combine to make the Pareto distribution somewhat inhospitable for use in a non-normal regression model because regression is intractable for certain values of its shape parameter. A nonexistent mean is obviously incompatible with our usual intuition about regression models. Infinite variance implies that meaningful variance estimates cannot be obtained, so the conventional Student\'92s 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 and F tests of statistical hypotheses may be misleading. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Researchers in other areas of economics have encountered the awkwardness of the Pareto distribution even in the univariate case. For example, Blattberg and Gonedes [7], in their analysis of stock prices, encountered an approximately Pareto-distributed variable with an infinite variance. They had some successin fitting the distribution equally well with a Student\'92s 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 distribution. However, this finding does not necessarily carry over to the regression case. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 The generalized gamma family of distributions mentioned above provides us with several candidates for alternative distributional assumptions for a city size regression model. Ideally, the random variable for city sizes, 
\fs24 t, 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 might be assumed to follow the three-parameter generalized gamma distribution with the mean of that distribution depending upon a vector of explanatory variables, x (which could include both city-specific and country-level variables). However, one chronic shortcoming of city size data has been overlooked: population data are reported only for cities larger than a certain size. Cities smaller than this size are unobserved. The full distribution of city sizesmust therefore be inferred from the shape of the upper tail of the distribution. This data deficiency a truncated distribution has been easy to accommodate in the conventional univariate Pareto distribution models of city sizes, because the absolute survival function (which is concerned only with the upper tail) has typically been used to fit the model.\
Generalized gamma regression models are complicated (but not impossible) to specify and to estimate in the case of censored dependent variables. However, since the cumulative density function associated with this distribution does not have a closed form, it is more difficult and expensive to formulate and estimate a truncated regression model based on it. However, the two-parameter Weibull distribution (a special caseof the three-parame- ter distribution) has not been explored for city sizesand may be appropriate (see Hastings and Peacock[ll]). The attractiveness of this distribution for a non-negative variable like city sizes stems from its convenient closed-form distribution function (to accommodate the truncation problem) and its ability to adopt a shape with a zero modal value (to allow it to mimic the shape of a Pareto density function). \
Because of its desirable properties, a regression model based on the Weibull distribution will be considered first. A Weibull distributed random variable 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 is defined over 0 < 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 < cc. Scale parameter b and shape parameter c are both constrained to be positive. The probability density function is 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 If we wish to design a regression model wherein the expected value of 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 is a log-linear function of a vector of explanatory variables, x, we must make one of these parameters a function of x. The usual choice is to let b = exp(x\'92/3). It is also convenient to define u = l/c. We can then make the change of variables from 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 to y = log(t). If 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 is Weibull distributed, then y is extreme-value distributed, with conditional density: 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 For this distribution, x\'92p is the modal value and u is the transformed shape parameter. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Without truncation, it would be straightforward to write down the joint density for n independent observations on y and x, reinterpret this as a likelihood function, and then maximize the logarithm of this likelihood function with respect to the jI vector and (I. However, an additional step is required to accommodate the truncation. The cumulative density function for an extreme-value distributed random variable is 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 The probability that y is greater than a given threshold, is therefore 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 To ensure that the area under the extreme-value density function beyond y* equals unity, we must scale it up by dividing by this probability. After simplification, the truncated log-linear Weibull (extreme-value) density function is 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 For a sample of n independent observations on city size, 
\fs24 t, 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 minimum recorded city size for the country wherein this city lies, 
\fs24 t*, 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 and a vector of city- and country-specific variables x, the log-likelihood function to be maximized is 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 where sums are from 1 to n, and subscripts on the variables have been suppressed. Optimal values of the parameter vector j? and the distribution shape parameter u = l/c can be found by maximizing this log-likelihood function.\'92 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 However, in addition to a truncated regression model based on the Weibull distribution (where the probability density function for 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 has the ability to take on a monotonic downward slope), we will examine how well the relationships in the data can be captured by a truncated log-linear normal specification (where the probability density function for 
\fs24 t 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 must have a non-zero mode). Conventional log-linear lognormal models are familiar to empirical researchersand can be estimated by ordinary least squares using the log of the dependent variable. With truncation, however, nonlinear optimization procedures must be used. If we adopt the steps described above, the log-likelihood function for the truncated log-linear lognormal regression model is 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 This log-likelihood function for the truncated model differs from the usual normal regression log-likelihood function only by the presence of the last term, where 0 symbolizes the standard normal cumulative density, which is an integral expression. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Limiting the sample to cities larger than an arbitrarily specified threshold size means that we are asking the upper tails to the conditional distributions to tell us the shape of the lower ends. Since formation on smaller cities is unavailable, we cannot appeal to information about the bottom end of the distribution to help us discriminate between the Weibull and the log-normal specifications. Despite our convictions that the modal size of settlements will be very small, the distribution giving the best fit to the top of the range may turn out to exhibit a modal value much larger than we believe. Unfortunately, the two truncated distribution models discussed in this section are non-nested models, so rigorous statistical assessmentof their relative performance is nontrivial. However, it is straightforward to examine the maximized values of the log-likelihood functions to determine which model 
\fs21\fsmilli10667 appears 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 to perform better for a 
\fs21\fsmilli10667 particular 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 data set. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Ideally, the data would be the populations of actual physical settlements, not just the populations which happen to reside within arbitrarily defined political boundaries of officially designated \'93cities.\'94 Rather than utilizing official city population figures, therefore, we have attempted to capture the effective populations of cities and their contiguous suburbs. In some cases, we employ MSA population figures, in others, we use PMSA populations. Our sample consists of 121 U.S. population centers with settlements of over 1oo,ooo.6 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 In order to illustrate the fitting of our regression model, we have also collected data on several metropolitan area-level explanatory variables. (See Table 1 for descriptive statistics.) Among these variables are two alternative metropolitan area age variables: AGE-S is computed using the time elapsed up to 1984 since the date when the area was first accessedor settled by Europeans; AGE-I is computed using the time since the settlement was first incorporated as a town or a city. DIST is the distance, in kilometers, from the approximate center of the settlement in question, to the center of the nearest other settlement over 100,000 in population. PORT is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the metropolitan area is either a seaport or a riverport. Census region dummy variables are also available. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 If we were to extend this study to more than one country, it would be straightforward to include variables such as those in the Rosen and Resnick study-variables which have common values for all cities within a country, but which differ among countries. At present, these data have not been assembled, since it is difficult to match the quality of the population figures or the age information without accessto foreign sources. Likewise, another interesting study could be generated if one could accumulate similar variables for U.S. settlements at different times. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 If we fit the model given in (1) to our sample of 121 U.S. metropolitan areas, we find the following relationship: 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 This suggests that 
\fs24 if 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 the univariate distribution of the metropolitan area sizes in this sample is Pareto, alpha is not significantly different from unity. This fitted parameter value also implies that the variance is undefined. Since the mean of the Pareto distribution disappears as alpha goes to one, the evidence from the marginal distribution suggests that a truncated Pareto regression model for these alphadata is in peril of being unsuccessful. Nevertheless, we attempted to estimate such a model. The simple density for a Pareto-distributed random variable is 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 where c is equivalent to alpha in (1). The associatedcumulative density is 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 We let the mean of the Pareto variable, c/(c - l), equal a linear combina- tion of a vector of explanatory variables, x\'92j3, so that. For the truncated model, the probability that t exceeds t* is given by (t*)-\'91. The log-likelihood function to be maximized by an appropriate choice of p is therefore\
Not surprisingly, in the optimization of this log-likelihood function, convergence could not be achieved. The elements of /3 immediately became extremely large in absolute value, so that went effectively to one. While this failure to converge reflects the properties of this data set, the tendency of city size distributions to satisfy the rank-size rule approximately suggeststhat this problem will afflict most attempts to use truncated Pareto regression models to explain city sizes. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 As suggested in Section 3, our recourse is to consider other families of distributions as candidates to describe the size of distribution of metropolitan areas. First, it is useful to consider the univariate distribution of metropolitan area sizes, without regressors. Fitting a truncated extreme-value distribution to log(SIZE) yields parameters b = 6.736 and u = 1.198 (with standard errors 0.1522 and 0.1240, respectively). The log-likelihood is -160.233. The magnitude of u = l/c suggeststhat c equals 0.8347. When the c parameter of the corresponding Weibull distribution is less than one, the density function is monotonically downward sloping like a Pareto distribution. Thus, the fitted marginal distribution is consistent with existing intuition about metropolitan area sizes. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 However, fitting a univariate truncated normal distribution to log(SIZE) yields parameters b = 4.297 and u = 0.3454 (with standard errors 0.1905 and 0.02785, respectively). The log-likelihood for this model is -152.617. Apparently, for 
\fs24 this 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 data set and in the univariate case, the log-normal density provides a better fit to the data. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Now we can consider the inclusion of regressorsto control for systematic variation in the sizes of metropolitan areas. Again, we first examine the extreme-value model for log(SIZE), which corresponds to the assumption that SIZE itself is Weibull distributed. As in any log-linear model, the fitted regression coefficients can be interpreted as the percentage change in the dependent variable for a one-unit change in the explanatory variable. Results for two log-linear models with extreme-value distributed errors appear in the first two columns of Table 2. The first model uses approximate settlement dates to construct the AGE-S variable; the second uses official township or city incorporation dates to construct AGE-I. The first version of the model performs slightly better (on the log-likelihood criterion) so we will emphasize its results. A l-year greater AGE-S for a metropolitan area means a 0.4% increase in its size, 
\fs24 ceteris paribus. 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 A 1% greater distance to the nearest large settlement decreasesa metropolitan area\'92s expected sizeby 24%.This implies that remote metropolitan areasare smaller, an effect which overwhelms any evidence of urban \'93hierarchies.\'94 The hierarchy hypothesis suggeststhat more-isolated metropolitan areas will be larger, which is contradicted in our model. However, we have not controlled for the fact that the \'93hub\'94 of a cluster of settlements is predicted to be larger. The hub will itself be very close to other cities, thwarting any attempt to use this simple linear specification to test other hierarchies. Better data are required. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 If a metropolitan area has arisen as a seaport or riverport, it is on average 58%larger than anonport metropolitan area.And, interestingly, metropolitan areas in the New England census region tend to be much smaller. The model using incorporation dates yields similar parameters. Alternative specifications were explored, but the simple models summarized in Table 2 seemto be the most robust.7 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 In contrast to our finding in the 
\fs24 uniuariute 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 extreme-value case,allowing explanatory variables to influence the location parameter makes a decided difference to the shape of the fitted conditional distribution. In the regression case,we find that (r = l/c = 0.8795.This implies that c = 1.137in the corresponding Weibull density function. Soit seemsthat including explanatory variables causesthe fitted conditional probability density function to have a non-zero modal value. It is no longer monotonically downward sloping. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Since the log-linear Weibull model is apparently now less desirable on 
\fs24 a priori 
\fs26\fsmilli13333 grounds, we turn to fitting the distribution of log(SIZE) using truncated normal errors, with results displayed in the last two columns of Table 2. In the version of this model using incorporation dates, the significant influence of AGE-I disappears. However, AGE-S remains significant if we measure age from settlement dates.The log of distance still has a significant effect upon metropolitan area size, but this effect is somewhat smaller than that implied by the extreme-value model. Likewise diminished is the effect of a port location, and New England settlements are now less markedly smaller. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 Which error structure is to be preferred, the extreme-value (Weibull) or the normal (lognormal)? The maximized value of the log-likelihood function for the normal specification is better by 4.796 when settlement dates are used and better by 3.835 if incorporation datesdetermine AGE. But, we must reiterate, these models are non-nested so we are unable to determine whether this difference is statistically significant. If our models did not involve truncated dependent variables, it would be a simple matter to generalize both the extreme-value and the normal models using a three- parameter log-generalized gamma distribution. However, as mentioned above, the nonclosed form of the cumulative density function means that a dramatically greater programming effort would be required to fit such a model (since specialized numerical integration routines would be necessary). 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 One firm conclusion is that while the Pareto distribution may adequately represent the uniuariate distribution of city sizes,we should not ignore the fact that the distribution of city sizeswill depend upon many factors - not just the country-level factors examined in previous studies, but also the characteristics of the cities themselves. If we take as given the supposition that distribution of city sizes is an interesting issue, we should not be content with merely describing the shape of the univariate marginal distribution. Instead, we should be employing a one-stage model and should be asking what factors systematically affect the sizes of specific cities, rather than simply considering what it is about certain countries that causestheir city size distributions to be more skewed. We have not explicitly addressed the second issue in our empirical example, choosing instead to emphasize the former. Still, our models would readily incorporate such variables. Most importantly, the commonly used Pareto distribution is not very useful in regression models and alternative distributional assumptions must be explored. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 One obvious shortcoming of this study is its static nature. It would be interesting to collect a time series of cross-sections on city sizes, which would allow us to model some portion of the dynamics of city growth. Reassuringly, the econometric models examined here can accommodate different minimum reported sizesof cities in different censusyears. Having laid the groundwork for empirical analysis, we hope that such studies will now be easier to conduct. It will even be possible to extend the regression models explored here to allow the presently constant shape parameters for the conditional distribution of city sizesto vary systematically over time or across regions or countries. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 With richer data, it may be possible to examine more closely the implications of the economic theory behind city sizedistributions developed by researchers such as Beckmann [4], Tinbergen [21], Beckmann and McPhearson [5], and, more recently, Alperovich [l, 21and Taylor [20]. 
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 In conclusion, this paper has undertaken to demonstrate somelimitations of existing empirical work analyzing city size distributions. In addition to criticism, however, we have examined richer, more general structural models with the potential to yield results which are of more interest to policy-makers than many of the descriptive models which have been employed so far. We have extended the parametric \'93distribution-fitting\'94 branch of the literature to normal and non-normal regression models which include a variety of city-level explanatory variables and accommodate the lower truncation of city size data. }